https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwzhfAxyJKsvKALjX2LpXv3wXkdJ6sDtMorS9OCFlnzGDOv6r2xzL1ncWqNEGoIEuEPKuUoXvppi1zGHqr8A7BjQGiq2baY9tQavfOlBGw7F6gS33O-LJBKQYoaEAiguVwzC9H3jw=w874-h1280-v0

47352834-e3ce-475d-ba8a-f49cfad5fba7

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxX1raLxPMSaR53VV74n0fS2jJJEwzrLdC_OP7lsgqH4JvMppSou5tQixF4OMF0G7TeNR4T488JSco_2ythpAOFrawr2De6oMiPC6vR_gug31ThwY6_Z9aqagi_VFdtIbj90cGP=w615-h900-v0

96382592-4d64-4eff-9c69-0b697db38efe

datboltc Stanfcarfc %ibrar\> 

VOLUME FIVE 

THE GREAT COMMENTARY OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAylej2BcJHwDu9FslNhRxWN5kN3zk1FIcESrlZJt0BP1uGhbfHCC5st0J3tRnsGEWt04VUNEzAbfjD32zJ7IskurgivhuS82IkcTsxwJTgxyEThp1g4IH9V9o3EUUQXA_0YYbS9hw=w874-h1280-v0

39f8b497-8f71-4c7d-855b-f8790f330525

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxWVP3KmcqHJXMNvHbEBNZ2xAYyAsSFGEfHnwLdPWp0wQmxSgI5QYFoVHmYH7YfcCpBwQdT9sB_nVaE8d-bWGgD9j6CMWLrOLiUL77U9sppqgJWZUWTuSPsme-wgJf5FCabAu8zGA=w615-h900-v0

9386a4f7-d643-438d-86d6-a93aa6a8b0d0

THE 

GREAT COMMENTARY OF 

CORNELIUS A LAPIDE 

TRANSLATED BY 

THOMAS W. MOSSMAN, B. A, RECTOR OF TORRINGTON, LINCOLNSHIRE 

ASSISTED BY VARIOUS SCHOLARS 

« A T t -* ' -: •• - :'• • 

S. JOHN'S GOSPEL.—CHAPS. I TO XI 

THIRD EDITION 

EDINBURGH : JOHN GRANT 31 GEORGE IV BRIDGE 

1908

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxf4YsMMrRIkg6Ga8MdpNRDZ7OYg3rTcnOIABE5tEqZr6bnvwbsUs-1ioKVxwkvfnLdJoYxv255mz2qzC8yrkj9SEoHZ5Q31eXD5PgtH5i-BGJPmmC83WhStU8fjDyM0g2852Wzng=w874-h1280-v0

779d471c-25a7-46f9-9453-c3fd83832b48

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzVfzpr9lsCKnjvwgCnMn0ZqDdbYRJZYSBHAhsqFt2mHRv4syMsAgVZDCcXsULLt3hvbYAA2tVhRGK7dZ-DzIK9YnCF6iYGKJPsDg5oGYrlQxz58avDyzxt6DL9sfWnd0JUa9TXKA=w615-h900-v0

7df70e04-57ed-4efe-9838-619246ac4f83

NOTICE TO THE READER. 

AS it has been found impossible to compress the Translation 

L*- of the Commentary upon S. John's Gospel into one 

volume, it is now given in two, of which this is the first. 

The second volume comprises the remainder of the Gospel, and 

the Commentary of A Lapide upon S. John's Epistles. 

It is with great pleasure I present this portion of this great 

Commentary to the English reader. Admirable as Cornelius 

a Lapide almost invariably is in his exposition of Holy 

Scripture, on the Gospel of S. John he seems to me to surpass 

himself. Beginning from the Incarnation of the Divine Word, 

nothing can be more masterly, nothing more magnificent, 

than the way in which he shows that the whole sacramental 

system of the Catholic Church of Christ is the necessary 

consequence and complement, as well as the extension of 

the Incarnation, Divinely planned and ordained for the 

eternal salvation of the whole human race. Granted the 

truth of the Incarnation as an objective fact, dealing with 

realities both in the spiritual and immaterial universe, and 

also in the material and physical universe, in this world of 

time and sense, as we call it, I do not see how it is possible 

to dispute our author's conclusions, taken as a whole. 

The translation of Vol. I. is by myself as far as the end of 

the 6th chapter, or page 263. From the 37th verse of 6th

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzh6ZtRuc1QomIBF6bLnallbOMwmIx1DNPaKpLO05eUu37GZjIrvLxLxr2-x3cfj_H7lLG3-2b8cQ-z6_i0G5JrJlMxKGW1NsK-3cAxUMYdrG19YfbNtbohJQtb8OPSaLCA5e8r=w615-h900-v0

6ee02f81-e6dd-40c5-b267-f7ba1117f946

vi NOTICE TO THE READER. 

chapter to the end, I have translated practically without any 

abridgment or omission, and also with greater literalness than 

I sometimes do, on account of the surpassing importance of 

the doctrine treated of, and the controversies resulting from 

it. Chapters vii.-x. are by the Rev. James Bliss, Rector 

of Manningford Bruce. For the last chapter, the nth, I am indebted to the Rev. S. J. Eales, M.A., D.C.L., lately 

Principal of S. Boniface's College, Warminster, and now 

Principal of the Grove College, Addlestone, Surrey. 

In Volume II., the Translation of chap. xiii. is by a young 

scholar, Mr. Macpherson. The remainder of the Gospel is by 

my most kind friend, Mr. Bliss, and myself. 

Of S. John's Epistles, the first three chapters of the First 

Epistle are by Mr. Bliss, the remaining two chapters, and the 

Second and Third Epistles, are by myself. 

T. W M.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwUdgcr2emDCepE4v_U7upDhdB-vn8o8Vf_SOJd0IYI59yDyS0SBK9lwhB9HEfv4lWI9ArnNESfryjE0IvK-XlIhTwF8SNofJUM9m2odY_Et3PfFHp3PUE-ks8XgYAqfxRBAi34oA=w615-h900-v0

dc9844cd-294a-4f92-8a9e-7819528fadac

THE PREFACE TO 

S. JOHN'S GOSPEL. 

C* JOHN the Apostle, the son of Zebedee and Salome, wrote 

^^* this Gospel in Asia in the Greek language, towards the 

end of his life, after his return from Patmos, where he wrote the 

Apocalypse. 

His reasons for writing were two. The first was that he might 

confute the heretics Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied Christ's 

Divinity, and taught that He was a mere man. The second was 

to supply the omissions of Matthew, Mark and Luke. Hence 

S. John records at length what Christ did during the first yeat 

of His ministry, which the other three had for the most part 

passed over. 

Listen to S. Jerome in his preface to S. Matthew. " Last was 

John, the Apostle and Evangelist, whom Jesus loved the best, who 

lay upon the Lord's bosom, and drank of the purest streams of His 

doctrines. When he was in Asia, at a time when the seeds of the 

heresies of Cerinthus, Ebion and the rest, who denied that Christ 

had come in the flesh, those whom in his Epistle he calls Antichrists, 

and whom the Apostle Paul frequently refutes, he was constrained 

VOL. IV. A

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz28FYaOZm7Nz-A4Fd0lKSShddQgw2Gqj47h9ZtWTDEvoFRE2_VhqLcJp-wlmFb_tTdksesRHHGq8cb0BUUv9saBJk8jZWSO5vS0CiGaglqjCdfk9i0OdnCwQNjpJCRXNVbi-lEnQ=w615-h900-v0

3d8a9794-7513-4ed0-9e2c-1bd1e010e895

2 PREFACE. 

by well nigh all the bishops who were at that time in Asia, and by 

the deputies of many other Churches, to write of the deep things of 

the Divinity of our Saviour, and to 'break through,' 1 as it were, to 

the Word of God by a kind of happy temerity. Whence also we are 

told in ecclesiastical history that when he was urged by the brethren 

to write, he agreed to do so, on condition that they should all fast, 

and pray to God in common. When the fast was ended, being 

filled with the power of revelation, he burst forth with the preface 

coming straight from above, In the beginning was the Word, and the 

Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same -was in the 

beginning with God." 

Others add that S. John's beginning to write was preceded by 

lightnings and thunderings, as though he had been another Moses, 

who thus received the Law of God (Exod. xix.) 

Baronius shows that S. John wrote his Gospel in the year of 

Christ 99, or sixty-six years after the Ascension. This was the 

first year of the reign of Nerva, and the twenty-seventh after the 

destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. 

As then Isaiah surpassed all the rest of the Prophets in sublimity, 

so did John the other Evangelists. Last in time, he is first in dignity 

and perfection. Thus in the first chapter of Ezekiel he is compared 

to an eagle flying above all other birds. This his dignity and 

special excellence, as well as his consequent obscurity, may be con-

sidered under three heads. 

First, his matter and scope. S. John alone of set purpose treats 

of the Divinity of Christ, of the origin, eternity, and generation of 

the Word, of the spiration of the Holy Spirit, of the unity of the 

Godhead, and of the Divine relations and attributes. Matthew, 

Mark, and Luke are concerned with the actions of Christ's humanity. 

1 Cf. Exod. xix. 21, Trans.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyiwRyaBvRKj3QqG-1pQuKNHpyYAXDW57Doo4ZzQm0Z4Gy2LZBItuSPBJXoUt8t8RdqkS_GscH4sxmoNiBMnwnApHeLMZOtBTP11bd0AR0rmbUOeHDhLE85QIfzNtoxzhIqeFKrig=w615-h900-v0

70ed7e87-e5d8-4988-ac4f-bfad06b397f1

PREFACE. 3 

This is why the Fathers derive almost all their arguments against the 

Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians and such like heretics from S. John. 

The second is the order of time. We know that the Church, like 

the dawning of the day, advanced by the succession of time to the 

perfect day of the knowledge of the mysteries of the faith. Thus 

the sacred writers of the New Testament, the Apostles and Evan-

gelists, write far more clearly concerning them than do Moses and 

the Prophets of the Old Testament. John was the last of all, and 

his Gospel was his last work. He composed it therefore as a sort 

of crown of all the sacred books. 

The third is the author. S. John alone was counted worthy to 

win the laurels of all saints. For he is in very deed a theologian, 

or rather the prince of theologians. The same is an apostle, a 

prophet and an evangelist. The same is a priest, a bishop, a high 

priest, a virgin, and a martyr. That S. John always remained a virgin 

is asserted by all the ancient writers, expressly by Tertullian {Lib. de 

monogam.) and S. Jerome {Lib. i contra Jovin.) To him therefore 

as a virgin Christ from His cross commended His Virgin Mother. 

For " blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God," as the 

Truth Itself declares. 

The Only Begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, made 

known to this His most chaste and beloved friend, who reclined upon 

His breast, the hidden things and sacraments of the Divinity, which 

had been kept secret from the foundation of the world. John hath 

declared the same to us, as a son of thunder, thundering and lighten-

ing the whole world with the Deity of the Word. As with a flaming 

thunderbolt "he hath given shine to the world;" and with the fire 

of love he hath inflamed it. Let that speech of Christ, His longest 

and His last, bear witness, which He made after supper (S. John xiii. 

&c), which breathes of nothing but the ardour of Divine love.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzJUylMwIlX9FxUftl_E-lap61_9Z0G31f84T3Be9J-nhAJ-YFuMb6NFYa0FLXHHkQ8rKHO_HwTQgmSRBwW5Sx5EelHiDXTyvpAuW7IhVUk2zkekXTh2uvcIlBphlmRqfRjmU-Smg=w615-h900-v0

cf96b9eb-d393-4183-b1e7-3c6e3e419bc6

4 

PREFACE. 

See more to the same effect in S. Cyril, S. Augustine, and S. 

Chrysostom (Pram, in Joan.) Indeed, S. Chrysostom dares to say 

that S. John in his Gospel hath taught the angels the secrets of the 

Incarnate Word, such as before they knew not, and that therefore he 

is the Doctor of the cherubim and the seraphim. He proves this 

from the passage of S. Paul in Ephesians iii., " that there might be 

made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly places by 

the Church the multiform wisdom of God." " If," he says, " the 

principalities and powers, the cherubim and seraphim, have learned 

these things through the Church, it is very evident that the angels 

listen to him with the deepest attention. Not slight therefore is 

the honour which we gain in that the angels are our fellow- disciples 

in the things that they knew not.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzrvjzlpprMk7DZpOlhhXit83XR-HMCCAtH-Gez-bUB9ZU32x3BG7lCek-XScIq54J4OzI3scOqoy0nR8jf7IXCDk5RGCPBNO64DP3U9kigUESWQprAgS0veRvqzKb5EVuAC3Oo=w615-h900-v0

a7503640-5f23-4335-ae6d-38c508fd92c2

CANONS THROWING LIGHT 

UPON THE 

INTERPRETATION OF S. JOHN'S GOSPEL. 

i. JOHN has a style peculiar to himself, entirely different from 

that of the other Evangelists and sacred writers. For as 

an eagle at one time he raises himself above all, at another time 

he stoops down to the earth, as it were for his prey, that with the 

rusticity of his style he may capture the simple. At one time he 

is as wise as the cherubim, at another time he burns as do the 

seraphim. The reason is because John was most like Christ, and 

most dear to Him ; and he in turn loved Christ supremely. There-

fore at His Last Supper he reclined upon His breast. From this 

source, therefore, he sucked in, as it were, the mind, the wisdom, 

and the burning love of Christ. Wherefore, when thou readest and 

hearest John, think that thou readest and hearest Christ. For 

Christ hath transfused His own spirit and His own love into 

S. John. 

2. Although John by the consent of all wrote his Gospel in Greek 

for Greeks, yet because he himself was a Hebrew, and from love of 

this primeval language, which was his native tongue, he abounds 

above the rest in Hebrew phrases and idioms. Hence to under-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz-GI7XZxenehmJvqN4HBQfvACpRcgSs8bDegzjFrQ7RKYGSUL6-uUz92Uwk1DmcFAyRyY3kogLpojuGcX0oexd4_8esQYVQnWgDmzPxhwRAGQPaSeRDu4YN35391V5OC5CDV4iFQ=w615-h900-v0

4f34be66-aba6-4f0e-bab5-faa8b448ae11

6 CANONS THROWING LIGHT 

stand him we require a knowledge of two, or indeed of three 

languages—Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Thus he Hebraizes in his 

frequent use of and for like as (siait), as Solomon does in Proverbs, 

where he compares like with like by means of the conjunction and. 

And in such instances is a mark of similitude, and has the same 

meaning as like as (sicut). On the other hand, he Grecizes in his 

use of perchance (forsilan) for surely. In John viii. 19 the Greek 

particle av expresses affirmation, not uncertainty. So also in viii. 43 

oh dvvueds, ye are not able, is put for ye are not willing. He likewise 

constantly duplicates the Hebrew Amen, when the other Evangelists 

only express it once. The reasons for this diversity are examined 

in chap. iii. 2. 

3. John abounds more in the discourses and disputations of Christ 

with the Jews than in the things that were done by Him. Not that 

he relates all the discourses and disputations of Christ, but such as 

were of greater importance. Especially he gives a compendious 

account of those in which Christ proved that He was God as well 

as man. 

4. In S. John Christ speaks sometimes as God, and sometimes as 

man. There is need therefore of a careful examination of contexts 

to distinguish one from the other. 

5. When Christ says, as He often does in S. John, that He "does, or says nothing of Himself," or that " not He, but the Father, 

does, or says this, or that," there must be understood "originally" 

and "alone." As thus, "neither alone, nor as man perform I these 

things 

: 

nor yet as God am I the first originator of them; but it is 

God the Father, who together with His Divine essence communi-cates to Me omniscience and omnipotence, even the power of doing 

all things." 

6. Although the Apostles and other saints wrought miracles, yet

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwM_DYAzAjmhz7XnPWYmPmmCKbEkW4aTj9UMe3HLHeyLxx28gkDc-LaDNvAEe4CjLJlpW32CJ8M6WoS1icClVbnhLIX2wpK44BrufzXCuQXyQtWajsxc-0FThmM1411bPWNM4sPQA=w615-h900-v0

b83de747-a5bf-4d28-9f2f-b928ba992cfa

UPON THE INTERPRETATION. J 

Christ in S. John's Gospel often proves that He is the Messiah and 

God by the miracles which were done by Him. This proof is a 

true and effectual one ; first, because He Himself made direct use of 

it. For a miracle as the work of God, and the true Voice of the 

prime Verity, is an infallible proof of that which it is brought forward 

to confirm. Second, because Christ wrought them by His own power 

and authority, which He could not have done unless He had been 

God of God. Thus then He did them that they might appear to 

proceed from Him as from God, the original source of miracles. 

For the saints do not work miracles by their own authority, but by 

the invocation of the name of God, or Christ. Let us add that the 

miracles which were done by Christ had been foretold by Isaiah 

and the other prophets, that they might be indices and marks of the 

Messiah, as will appear in chap. xi. 4. 

7. Matthew, Mark, and Luke record for the most part the acts of 

the last year, and the last year but one of Christ's ministry, that is to 

say, what He did after the imprisonment of S. John the Baptist. 

But S. John's Gospel for the most part gives an account of the two 

preceding years. This consideration will solve many seeming dis-

crepancies between S. John and the other Evangelists. So S. 

Augustine in his preface. 

8. There is frequently in S. John both great force as well as 

obscurity in the adverbs and conjunction of causation, inference, 

connection, and so on, in such a manner that a single particle will 

often include and point out the entire meaning of a passage. Hence 

these particles must be most carefully examined and weighed, as I 

shall show in each place. 

9. The particles that, wherefore, on account of which, and the like, 

do not always signify the cause, or the end intended, but often only 

a consequence or result. This is especially the case if an event has

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyTW8U7yRNgv0GQmPtdA2zrzPGpXdbb5tr9Soy9hw3qRVR-mkFDGUhEVJuxWCChKpKJEmr2wXo1_rHwT54Qe1lrUIjNeqcmLzEyPE7wMxGJaub9wJcLkhJHZxJ1mqHbSQRL6BKBzQ=w615-h900-v0

84460b70-8550-4fba-89aa-969f4fe0e228

8 CANONS THROWING LIGHT 

been certainly foreseen, and therefore could not happen otherwise. 

This is plain from chap. xii. 38, 39, where it is said, They believed not 

on Him, that the saying of Isaias might be fulfilled: and shortly after-

wards, Wherefore they could not believe, because Isaias said again, He 

hath blinded their eyes. For the reason why the Jews would not 

believe in Christ was not the prediction of Isaiah foretelling that 

they would not believe (non credituros), but the hardness of heart 

and malice of the Jews, which as a sort of objective cause preceded 

Isaiah's prophecy. For Isaiah foretold that the Jews were not about to 

believe, because in truth they themselves through their own malice 

and obstinacy were not going to do so. So S. Chrysostom and others. 

10. By the Jews S. John sometimes means the rulers only, some-

times the people only. Thus he represents the Jews at one time as 

opposing, at another time as favouring Christ. For the people were 

His friends, the rulers were His adversaries. 

11. By a Hebraism the present tense often signifies not an action 

issuing in a result, but a force, or power of nature, or the act (in the 

sense of will or intention, Trans.) of the agent, even in cases where 

the effect is opposed by the subject, or in some other way. Thus 

in i. 9 it is said that Christ by His advent gave light to the world. 

That means, so far as He was concerned. For many, like the Jews, 

refused to receive this light, as he immediately adds, and continued 

in the darkness of their unbelief. 

12. The particles as if, so as, and the like, because they corre-

spond to the Hebrew caph, do not always signify likeness, but the 

truth of a fact, or assertion. Thus in i. 14, we have seen His glory, 

as of the Only Begotten, means, "we have seen the glory of the Only Begotten to be truly such, and so great as became Him who was indeed the Only Begotten Son of God the Father." So S. Chrysostom and others.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwvhli7WrryzyG7vQK1pt8FIHJ_0z9AQ5h1TMtCHE3sejz6xTmH-Gb43BfiodGuo88zEcsjGZiKR42xhglZN0PDg0gmiwiNneySufEGoquYDXcrACBWUi6-rIZPgfZXqd5VtM8b=w615-h900-v0

9c6166ed-3e5e-4a8f-97a4-fc757e887f3f

UPON THE INTERPRETATION. 9 

13. John, following the Hebrew idiom, sometimes takes words of 

inceptive action to signify the beginning of something that is done 

 

but sometimes to signify continuation, that a work is in progress 

and sometimes, that a work has been perfected and accomplished. 

Thus we must not be surprised, if sometimes that which increases, 

or is being perfected, is spoken of as if it were just commencing, 

and vice versa. An example of inceptive action is to be found in 

xvi. 6, where Peter, resisting Christ desiring to wash his feet, says, 

Lord, dost Thou wash my feet ? Dost Thou wash 7 that is, " Dost 

Thou wish, prepare, begin to wash ? " There is an example of 

continued action in ii. n, where, after the miracle of the conver-

sion of water into wine, it is added, And His disciples believed in 

Him : that is, they went on believing, they increased, and were 

confirmed in faith. For they had already before this believed in 

Christ, for if they had not believed in Him, they would not have 

followed Him as His disciples. There is an example of a perfected 

action in xi. 15, where Christ, when about, at the close of His life, 

to raise up Lazarus, said, Iam gladfor your sakes, thatye may believe. 

That is, " that by means of this My last and greatest miracle ye may 

be altogether made perfect in your belief in Me." Again, in xx. 17, 

Jesus appearing after His resurrection to Mary Magdalene, who had 

fallen at His feet, said, Touch Me not. That is, "Do not delay, 

and waste time in touching My feet, but go quickly, and tell the 

Apostles, who are very sorrowful because of My death, that I have 

risen again." 

14. John, after the Hebrew idiom, asserts and confirms over 

again what he had already asserted, by a denial of the contrary. 

This is especially the case when the subject matter is of importance, 

and is doubted about by many, so that it requires strong confirma-

tion. Thus in i. 20, when John the Baptist is asked by the Jews

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxvkBUQ9YDVaPkMt0XM09MhE0jv1TaZhpdtN9sQeHw62K35GhmOPKrfnMHqwedDvooM_vNwVt1AhqFseXc__I_lHjpRthzWj2ApwbxxvtIhtYeROqIUfuMV8TBT2Lfa3kHtbCa5tw=w615-h900-v0

368eb048-2af6-443f-a3b7-9ab521ab7e2d

io Canons throwing light 

if he were the Christ, he confessed, and denied not, but confessed, I 

am not the Christ. And in i. 3, All things were made by Him, and 

without Him was not anything made that was made. 

15. John delights in calling Christ the Life, and the Light, for 

reasons which I will give hereafter. He has several other similar 

and peculiar expressions. For instance, he often uses the word 

judgment for condemnation which takes place in judgment. In other 

places he uses judgment for the secret judgments and decrees of 

God, because they are just. Sins he calls darkness. The saints he 

calls sons of light. That which is true and just he calls the truth. 

In vi. 27, for procure food, or labour forfood'he has Igya^si^/ figuHsw, 

In the 9th chap., when Jesus is asked by the Jews, Who art Thou? 

He answers, The Beginning, who also am speaking unto you. 

16. S. John relates that Christ said previously certain things, the 

when and the where of His saying which He had not previously 

mentioned. For studying brevity, he considered it sufficient to 

relate them once. Thus in the nth chap, he says that Martha said 

to her sister Mary, The Master is come, and calleth for thee. Yet he had 

not previously related that Christ bade Martha to call Magdalene 

 

for his mentioning that Martha, by Christ's command, called her 

sister was sufficient to show that Christ had so commanded. In 

the same chapter Christ saith to Martha, Said I not unto thee, that if 

thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God? Yet there 

is no previous account of Christ saying this. Also in vi. 36, Christ 

says, But I said unto you, that ye also have seen Me and believe not. 

Yet we nowhere recall that Christ previously so said. 

17. The miracles of Christ which John alone records are as 

follows :—The conversion of water into wine, chap. ii. The first 

expulsion of the sellers from the Temple, in the same chapter. The healing of the sick child of the nobleman, iv. 47. The healing of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx2Z1a6b9HA1GQiX3a-jMd44jeUEup8cDPa1-D9A6DNLprtwxYGozvS59E1SqP09pLeVUeMLwbEtLtOvR08SgxwizsPla1L8fBC_q6zi787uRlOO3GOsxgjJOLko97-eKsfKuBX=w615-h900-v0

22202454-4442-48e5-ae89-650059f5e6d2

UPON THE INTERPRETATION. tt 

the paralytic at the pool in the sheep-market, chap. v. Giving sight 

to the man born blind, chap. ix. The raising Lazarus from the 

dead, chap. xi. The falling of Judas and the servants to the earth, 

when they came to take Jesus, xviii. 6. The flow of blood and 

water from the side of Christ after He was dead, xix. 34. The 

multiplication of the fishes, xxi. 6. 

COMMENTATORS. 

Very many persons have written commentaries upon the Gospel 

of S. John, and among them the principal Greek and Latin Fathers. 

Among the Greeks, after Origen, who composed thirty-two tomes, or 

books, upon this Gospel, were S. Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria, who 

has written a learned and very excellent commentary. He has 

written a didactic work, and is especially able and skilful in expound-

ing the literal sense. S. Cyril's commentary on S. John's Gospel 

consisted originally of twelve books. But of these the fifth, sixth, 

seventh, and eighth have perished. Their loss has been supplied 

by Clictovseus, a doctor of Paris, whose work has been mistaken 

by many learned men for the original of S. Cyril. 

A second commentator is S. Chrysostom, who seems to have been 

imbued with the very spirit of S. John himself. He wrote eighty-

seven homilies on this Gospel. 

A third is Theophylact, and a fourth Euthymius. They, as is 

usual with them, follow S. Chrysostom. Theophylact is the more 

diffuse of the two. 

A fifth commentator is Nonnus Panopolitanus, an Egyptian, and 

a very eloquent writer, who, as Suidas says, explained the virgin 

theologian, that is, John the Evangelist, in heroic verses. Although

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyj8xKdIgtXyaw2b86LIrI9LLn_5mMKEDhat5uoqNEHvH4iV_JmZy30MY3Gn8ICAUVPbwulVFKzK-nf9ExFxTNn40tPC69IhqXMDLRcL5KDN_G02U14aXJTS0YkAfskqJcSOYdiWQ=w615-h900-v0

69180398-d6d0-4d1f-9a22-01048edbbf80

I2 CANONS THROWING LIGHT 

the commentary of Nonnus can properly only be called a paraphrase, 

nevertheless in many places he points out and illustrates the mean-

ing of the Evangelist in pithy sentences. 

Among the Latins the first and chief commentator is S. Augustine, 

who has written systematically upon the whole Gospel in one 

hundred and twenty-four tractates. 

The second is Venerable Bede, who follows S. Augustine passim, 

and often word for word. 

A third commentary is what is called the Gloss. Where observe 

that the Gloss is tripartite. The first is the Interlinear Gloss, so 

called because written between the lines of the sacred text. For 

that reason it is brief, but pithy, and treats many things in the 

Gospel learnedly and usefully. The second is the Marginal Gloss, 

because written on the margin of the text. To this is subjoined 

the Gloss of Nicolas Lyra. This Nicolas was called Lyra from a 

village in Normandy. He was a Jew by birth, and was converted to 

Christianity. He entered the Franciscan Order, and taught scholastic 

theology, a.d. 1320. He was a learned man, and skilled in Hebrew. 

He wrote his Gloss upon S. John and the other sacred writers, 

expounding them literally, and became so celebrated that it has 

passed into a proverb 

 

" If Lyra's hand had erst not swept his lyre, 

Our theologians had not danced in choir." 

However, we must keep this in mind, that he is too credulous 

with regard to Jewish fables and puerilities, giving too much heed 

to writers of his own nation, to the Rabbin, and especially to R. 

Salomon, who is a great retailer of fables. 

In later ages, and especially in our own day, many commen-

taries have been written upon this Gospel. Pre-eminent amon*

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzntC44U7yIkSRn6AN2McYe6AkjtuJlxUattJcKlJ9jb-ktiuuRZGSVhHkuVMLudMbf-_pqidmwY-8L-CFFo2ruXiBk5vC8GUIQYzWeFyXMUL--Vwqg922z8sT1VU0s6uRNdgelNA=w615-h900-v0

aaeab2bf-fdcc-47e5-819e-92ced45899a1

UPON THE INTERPRETATION. 13 

them are Maldonatus, of the Society of Jesus, who is copious, acute, 

elegant, and learned : Cornelius Jansen, who is exact, solid, and to 

be depended upon : Frank Toletus, who displays a sound judgment, 

especially in the application of metaphors and similitudes. Sebas-

tian Barradi has written a good literal commentary, mingling with it 

moral reflections. He is useful to preachers in affording materials 

for sermons, and showing how to treat them. Frank Ribera is 

brief, but as usual excellent and learned. Frank Lucas is entirely 

literal, but he uses the letter to draw the reader to pious affections. 

Among the heretics, Martin Bucer, Wolfgang Musculus, Bullinger, 

Brentius, Calvin, and Beza have written upon S. John's Gospel. 

Of all these authors Augustinus Marloratus has made a catena, 

which I read through and refuted when I was in Belgium.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx03-224-3RUhF6uchuCe0UGhBoclAQmqnnjXgy7Bq0YCw0ig1c6x9i9yp_B1IMnPE1jq0g9pCTme1sfGWJY0xc6DhPiFP38OM079HexIBUuBBfYfqU6amSjwNgKlW_WcH873Pyqg=w615-h900-v0

2c0d5c5a-206f-4af3-b7d6-31ffba1cb79b

THE 

HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST, 

ACCORDING TO JOHN. 

THIS is the title in the Greek and Latin codices. In the Syriac 

it is as follows, The Holy Gospel, the Preaching of Jouchanon 

(John), which he spake and preached in Ionic (Greek) at Ephesus. 

The Arabic has, The Gospel of the holy and great disciple, the 

Apostle John, the son of Zebedee, the beloved of our Lord Jesus 

Christ. 

CHAPTER I. 

1 The Divinity, Humanity, and Office ofJesus Christ. 15 The Testimony of 

fohn. 35 The Calling ofAndrew, Peter, &*c. 

IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 

2 The same was in the beginning with God. 

3 All things were made by him ; and without him was not any thing made 

that was made. 

4 In him was life ; and the life was the light of men. 

5 And the light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness comprehended it not. 

6 II There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. 

7 The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. 

8 He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. 

9 That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that Cometh into the 

world. 

10 He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwLqF5bkgHMpe2JjilgWWDqWSpjrizsWAcPcZW4bxRrYaWu54F-O4drdEtdeZDqvc1d9iP6SYPleZuTTzqQ3JQVoabpngMJ-HyVhFpbf9RqVMCT6PG44sTjXBgVwnTo9pNLCSPf0Q=w615-h900-v0

1d260453-79de-4153-9ac5-6c3208f25d9d

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. I 5 

1 

 

He came unto his own, and his own received him not. 

12 But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of 

God, even to them that believe on his name : 

13 Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will 

of man, but of God. 

14 And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his 

glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father), full of grace and truth. 

15 John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, 

He that cometh after me is preferred before me : for he was before me. 

16 And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace. 

17 For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 

18 No man hath seen God at any time ; the only-begotten Son, which is in the 

bosom of the Father, he hath declared him. 

19 And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from 

Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou ? 

20 And he confessed, and denied not ; but confessed, I am not the Christ. 

21 And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am 

not. Art thou that prophet ? And he answered, No. 

22 Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to 

them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? 

23 He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the 

way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaia?. 

24 And they which were sent were of the Pharisees. 

25 And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be 

not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet ? 

26 John answered them, saying, I baptize with water : but there standeth one 

among you, whom ye know not : 

27 He it is, who, coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet 

I am not worthy to unloose. 

28 These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John was 

baptizing. 

29 IT The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the 

Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world ! 

30 This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before 

me : for he was before me. 

31 And I knew him not : but that he should be made manifest to Israel, there-

fore am I come baptizing with water. 

32 And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like 

a dove, and it abode upon him. 

33 And I knew him not : but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same 

said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on 

him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. 

34 And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God. 

35 IT Again, the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples 

; 

36 And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God ! 

37 And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. 

38 Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What 

seek ye ? They said unto him, Rabbi (which is to say, being interpreted, Master), 

where dwellest thou ?

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwc731ylAsIl_d-4TTAXm5haci8E_des37uMskkX4wXYQlGWkrwKerUhnqzlZHo_1_zgYdqZfMyYto7Rxy4BMsvS-9EDJkUiHJXwqj1Fk0j3CyapNBvGVMOJq5Udnf9h6txuei-iw=w615-h900-v0

9720a63e-aa94-462d-8c8d-49ccd7bf9929

1 

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. 

39 He saith unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, 

and abode with him that day : for it was about the tenth hour. 

40 One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, 

Simon's Peter's brother. 

41 He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found 

the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. 

42 And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou 

art Simon the son of Jona : thou shalt be called Cephas, which is, by interpretation, 

A stone. 

43 The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and 

saith unto him, Follow me. 

44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 

45 Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of 

whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of- Nazareth, the son 

of Joseph. 

46 And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of 

Nazareth ? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. 

47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite 

indeed, in whom is no guile ! 

48 Nathanael said unto him, Whence knowest thou me ? Jesus answered and 

said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, 

I saw thee. 

49 Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God 

; 

thou art the King of Israel. 

50 Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee 

under the fig tree, believest thou ? thou shalt see greater things than these. 

51 And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see 

heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son oj 

man. 

In the beginning, &c. So the Persian, Syriac, Egyptian, Ethiopic, 

and Arabic, except that the last version has the article in the 

second and third clauses of the verse 

 

"the Word was with God, 

the Word was God." The Ethiopic for Word has cal, answering 

to the Latin Verbum, which is better than Set-mo, as Erasmus and 

the innovators translate the Greek X6yo;. 

John begins from the Godhead of the Word : first, because the 

right order and a full account of Christ require it; second, because in 

the time of S. John the heresies of Cerinthus and Ebion had arisen, 

which denied Christ's Divinity. 

After a similar manner did Moses begin his account of the genesis 

of the world, " In the beginning God created the heaven and the 

earth." Moses begins from the creation of the world, but John far

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwV-CKkJ7wQ4Fz5fhfcjwiZKfXwts84lXBSu46qjGl1gCM8IK9m2nS7p1N7qicaRm8ZWz45TeDQruqxhG0As0f7U090tCPYaXe5IJbaJKXC4lADvg7w5Yn09sDFhd--OfWvJamhMg=w615-h900-v0

7bff2188-4ac1-444c-80e5-c4029b45b2b3

THE ETERNITY OF THE WORD. \J 

higher, even from the eternity of the Word. Moses marks the 

beginning of time, in which God made all things. John marks a 

beginning which was from eternity, when the Word was, by which 

all things were made by God in time. John therefore takes up the 

exordium of Moses, and presupposes the beginning of the world, 

when he gives, so to say, an account of the long anterior beginning of 

the Word. Hence Tertullian, in his book against Hermogenes, truly 

asserts that the Gospel is the supplement of the Old Testament. 

S. John alludes to Ecclus. xxiv. 5, " I (the Eternal Wisdom) 

came forth from the mouth of the Most High, the first begotten 

before every creature." Also to Pro v. viii. 22, "The Lord pos-

sessed me in the beginning of His ways, before He made anything, 

from the beginning." Where the Septuagint translates, "The Lord 

built, or founded (Uriat) me the beginning of His ways, in His 

work. Before the age He founded me in the beginning, before He made the earth, and appointed the great depths." 

In the beginning, i.e., first, " in the Eternal Father," as Cyril says, 

and Origen. For by-and-by John says in the 14th verse, that the 

Word was in the bosom of the Father. Second, and more simply, 

Augustine, Bede, and Hilary, In the beginning, i.e., of the world, or 

of times, such as you can only imagine, which went on from all 

eternity before the foundation of the world. As much as to say, 

the Word was not made in the beginning of time, however ancient 

and imaginary ; but He existed then, because He was not made, 

but was begotten from eternity. Third, and most simply, Augustine, 

Chrysostom, and Basil, In the beginning, i.e., before all things, even 

from the beginning of all eternity, long before all angels, or men, 

or things created, the Word was. For S. John is here speaking of 

a true and real beginning (firinripium), just as Moses does in the 

first verse of Genesis, and Solomon in Prov. viii. 22. Wherefore 

all the Fathers from the passage prove the true Divinity and eter-

nity of Christ. This beginning S. John sets in opposition to Ebion, 

who affirmed that Christ began to be after His birth of the Virgin, 

and that He had no previous existence. So Cyril. Hence Nonnus 

expounds the expression, In the beginning, in a fivefold manner VOL. IV. B

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxgArHzyNMP85VXHHufJEo336iprX0z8iySK1XKnJ-EqQsaqjYqQGdHdjGgbDL3DW1C6Xx8jz8lsbWiJalIUd2ZWQovN5XJ0SUQst4jIUZyUSO9Hu7Btm1h8Khk1q_A9jKxtylENg=w615-h900-v0

8aec0c32-bc6a-4faa-8c98-9f5afc8ed90a

i8 S. JOHN, c. I. 

one following after another. He was in the beginning, saith he, 

first, as not subject to conditions of time ; second, as coeternal with 

the Father ; third, as equal to the Father by nature ; fourth, as in-

comprehensible ; fifth, as ineffable. The four last are consequences 

of the first. 

You will say, Eternity is infinite duration, having neither begin-

ning, nor end : why then is a beginning here spoken of ? I answer, 

the reason is, because of the weakness of the human intellect, which 

is not able to comprehend eternity, nor to conceive of it defi-

nitely, except by a comparison with time. Therefore it conceives of 

eternity as duration which is coexistent with all time—past, present, 

and future, and that not only time actual, but which can be con-

ceived of. Indeed, it precedes all time. The meaning therefore is 

this, In the beginning, that is, before all time, even that which can 

be imagined in the mind, the Word was. Think of millions of 

millions of years, as much as ever thou canst conceive in thy 

mind ; before all these, and whatsoever infinite number thou canst 

add, the Word was. This is why S. John repeats was four times, 

saying, In the beginning was the Word, &c, that thou mayest under-

stand that whatsoever time thou thinkest of, the Word was then : 

that in all ages, however far back thou goest, the Word was in those 

ages. Beginning therefore is here used relatively, for it is spoken 

with reference to all time, even that which far precedes. For as 

the whole substance and immensity of God is in every place what-

soever, yes, in every point of space, and yet it encompasses all 

space and every place, even what we can think of above the 

heavens, so likewise God's eternity, which altogether in time pre-

sent, or in one single instant of the duration of time, includes and 

embraces all time, past, present, and to come, and far exceeds 

and transcends it all. And this is what we mean when we say, 

following the words of S. John, that God's eternity was in the 

beginning. 

Thus we are able to ascend with our minds to the idea of the 

antiquity, and as it were the origin of eternity, which is here called 

principium, that is, the beginning of all duration and eternity.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwBZzpd_otxsuVpFcBud5Sf5X1P-8WoBlZhio4zNjKgkVHHSbprr_FgHzKxAQKvZQzv0LYbuYx-GSeUnO3JiOqdq3zxv6Ep_vmeZhqJf5nAco37u93KybiBlvV0aeJrNUN8qSIi=w615-h900-v0

c0a862b8-2ecc-413d-a63e-383e4e79db21

IN THE BEGINNING. 19 

Though indeed this beginning is without beginning, a commence-

ment without commencement. Therefore when we would say of 

anything, that it did not have a beginning in time, we say that it 

was in the beginning of all duration and eternity. And by this we 

mean nothing else but that it always existed, that it was from all 

eternity. This is the meaning of S. John when he says, In the 

beginning was the Word. This is also why we say in ordinary dis-

course, that God has existed from the beginning of eternity, that is, 

that He is from all eternity. 

Was : the expression was, says S. Basil upon these words of S. 

John, leads us to eternity, not as if the word was signified that the 

Word preceded the beginning, concerning which it is said, 77 was 

in the beginning, and consequently the beginning of time and the 

world were here to be understood (because the Word preceded in 

computation (raHone) only, as it were, for as everything whatsoever 

precedes its own duration, so also God is before His duration and 

eternity : for duration is the continuance and measure of the 

thing which exists and endures), therefore, even before, from all 

eternity, was the Word. Here observe that the word employed 

is was (erat), not has been (fiat), for has been signifies that which 

has existed, and passed away : but was signifies that it is even now, 

or that it is perennial and eternal. So S. Chrysostom, Cyril, and 

Theophylact. The Holy Ghost therefore suggested 7e>as to the 

mind and pen of S. John, as against the Arians, whom He foresaw 

would arise. They were wont to say, There was when there was no 

was ; meaning there was a time when the Son was not. From these 

words of S. John the Council of Nice condemns them ; because, 

In the beginning was the Word, i.e., from eternity. 

Moreover, S. Gregory Nazianzen observes that the substantive 

verbs is and was have a special application to God from the pleni-

tude of His essence. Wherefore God in Hebrew is called Jehovah, 

i.e., He who is. 

The Word, Gr. 6 Xoyog, That Word, eternal and divine, which is the 

Son of God, as even the Arians formerly allowed. For John soon 

after calls this Word the Only Begotten of the Father. So con-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyzFY_RcvBaSGfLU9dS3qlYT-gYITpfiKb0y1eXkq1UK67xWnEO1uHx2UkeFFwpJUSJaqQ_AnPOHf9P6LRx9To1kLaEAQJ7Bg_cu7wBhGw22yYW03bMJY7WWeZv-mtFYJ8iNzqaOg=w615-h900-v0

2010ccb3-8d49-4955-bccf-16df3c56544b

20 S. JOHN, C. I. 

stantly in Scripture, the Son is called the Word of the Father. S. 

Basil thought that the Holy Spirit might also be called the Word 

; 

but S. Thomas rightly observes that this can only be said improperly 

(improperly being used in the logical sense). 1 

You will ask why is the Son of God called the Word ? I answer 

that the Greek Xoyog (Logos) has many meanings, which are all 

applicable in this place, i. Logos may be translated reason, because, 

as reason proceeds from the mind, so does the Son from the 

Father. So SS. Chrysostom and Basil. 

2. Logos may be translated definition, because the Word definitely 

expresses and unfolds the nature and attributes of the Father. 

Wherefore Nicetas (in Orat. 42 Nazianz.) says, " The same relation 

that a definition bears to the thing defined does the Son bear to the 

Father. For He declares the Father as a definition declares that 

which is defined by it. Wherefore Christ said, ' Philip, he that seeth 

Me, seeth My Father also.' For the Son is a compendious demon-

stration of the Paternal nature ; for every offspring is a sort of tacit 

account, or definition, of its parent." 

3. Logos may be translated cause, because the Word is the cause 

of all things which have been created and produced by the Word 

of God. 

4. Aoyoi may be translated work, because the Word is the Work 

of the Father, coextensive with Him, coeternal and coequal. 

5. Aoyoi can be translated power, or virtue, because the Word 

is the strength and right hand of the Father. 

6. A0705 may be translated beauty, because the Word is the form, 

grace, and beauty of the Father. 

7. And chiefly, \6yog may be translated, with Tertullian, Cyprian, 

and Ambrose, speech (sermo), or rather Word 

( 

Verbum). This Word, 

or speech, is not of the mouth, but of the mind ; because as we by 

thinking form a conception to ourselves of the thing thought of, 

or understood, which is called the word of the mind, so the eternal 

Father, by comprehending and understanding His Essence, and all 

that belongs to It, has produced this Eternal Word, coequal with, 

1 Trans.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz8_3IyTFXtJXJugInQiB21G0oMZLRyQy7gB-K65WqNJl-KJ_r1NaOaVZSlvyS7Wmc5lLQ6vVWpAjbmwAwlQ9r0w3wujDQmDgcsgRt_YjL_7UToIu9j-z9qlijs4hcBbZN2y_OgcA=w615-h900-v0

b84c5e86-596b-4fc7-a640-e4daaa032bc5

THE WORD OF GOD. 21 

and like to, Itself, by means of which it comes to pass that this 

Word is God, and the Son of God, begotten of the Father. 

Hence also the Gentile philosophers, Trismegistus, Orpheus, Plato, 

and the rest of the Greeks, Chaldseans, and Egyptians called the 

Father t'Sun, i.e., mind; and the Son Logos, as it were, the offspring of 

the mind. See S. Augustine {lib. 7, Confess, c. 9). Whence that saying 

of Plato's, "A Monad begat a Monad, and in it reflected his ardour." 

He means, The Father begat the Son, and through Him breathed 

the Holy Spirit, which is the reciprocal Love of the Father and 

the Son. Many, however, are of opinion that Plato and the other 

Gentile philosophers mean by the Logos not the Son but the idea in 

the mind of God, according to which He created all things, and 

reflected His love back upon Himself, because He created the 

world on account of His love. 

Here observe, the Word of God is twofold. First, essential, 

because it is the very Intelligence of the Father, which together 

with essence, understanding, and will, He shares with the Son and 

the Holy Ghost. The second is notional, which is the Word pro-

duced by the Father, and subsisting personally, that is, as the Son. 

So S. Thomas (1 dist. 27 q. 2. a. 2). This is the twofold meaning 

of the Word, taken in its widest sense. 

I have written more upon the Word in 1 Epis. John, chap. i. 

ver. 1. Let me add here what S. Augustine says (Serm. 38 de 

Verb. Dom.) " The Word of God is, as it were, a Form, but not 

formed. It is the Form of all forms, over all things, and exist-

ing in all things. But some ask, How could the Son be begotten 

coeternal with the Father ? As if fire were eternal, would not its 

brightness be coeternal with it ? Is it not the same with the 

reflection in a mirror, or in water ? As, for example, a shrub would 

always have its reflection in the water beside which it grew." 

And S. Chrysostom says, " He said not Word simply, but by the 

article distinguished it from all others. For it is an Hypostasis, 

proceeding forth impassibly from the Father. This is the mean-

ing of was in the beginning, that it always existed, and with an 

infinite existence. For it is not said of the heaven and the earth,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwn5I_vmNQjCO99qBhLb7G7irdI3U3_6FHoxyFKdxWxHgWsg0Lu1TTxKI2NaF64iEw_s4CPhKCRMfY3j3C8klx9O6hXvuPHcDeYPHO2rIP6OCtrIW6rB52eGnElfE_pa1MGIh9IeA=w615-h900-v0

d04de052-4ca2-49f1-9a47-73507ea96713

22 S. JOHN, C. I. 

that they were in the beginning, but that they were made in the 

beginning. 

And the Word was with God. S. John meets an objection. 

Some one may say, " Where was the Word in the beginning, i.e., 

from eternity, when as yet there was no place, and no created 

nature of things ? " He answers, " The Word had no need of place, 

because It is spiritual, and divine ; but It was with the Father, as 

with that from which It derived Its origin." As it is said in the 18th 

verse, It was in the bosom of the Father. Or, as we might say, It was 

in the Father's House, which is God Himself, and His immensity. 

The preposition with denotes— i. Distinction of person, because 

indeed the Son is a different Person from the Father, not one and 

the same, as the Sabellians say. " For how should that which is 

one numerically be understood to be with itself?" says S. Cyril. 

" Before all things," says Tertullian (lib. 5 cont. Prax.) " God alone 

was Himself to Himself both universe and space and everything. 

But in this respect only was He alone, that He had nothing 

external to Himself, for not even then was He alone ; for He had 

with Himself what he had in Himself, His Reason, or that which 

the Greeks call His Logos." 

2. With denotes the loving and perfect union of the Son with the 

Father, by which it comes to pass that it is impossible for Him to 

be separated from the Father. So Nonnus. 

3. With denotes the equality of the Son with the Father. For 

to be with God, or near to (juxta) God, means to sit at the right 

hand of God, as it were God of the same substance as the Father. 

Wherefore Christ is said after His Ascension to have returned to 

the right hand of the Father (Mark xvi.) As Nonnus expounds, 

" the Son is sunthronos with the Father," a term which cannot be 

expressed by a single word in English, but which means an associate 

in the same throne, an assessor in the same seat. 

And the Word was God. The order of the words in the Greek 

is, And God was the Word. Lest the Arians should bring forward 

the objection, " If the Word was with God, then the Word was not 

God, John confutes them by anticipation,saying The Word was God.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyrNSbzM2wSywsPlAA1xMEdmDBgfBwa0W2W_KPD46rOsCXdg9IPdqQiazXX5Ue0ha12KwnzM32V5DDxkFl8I0uK6JH83sWYkNQ2H8uCkZJtJZ0TApKL87-ub4vNa4DcQLNLyZ5Ohw=w615-h900-v0

a3fa7100-b69d-4c1e-a8ce-f4063e613c73

GOD THE WORD. 23 

For the Arians placed the interior and essential Word of God, that 

is, the Intelligence of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (as the 

orthodox faith is) in one Person of Godhead, coeternal with Him-

self. They said that God began to be a Father in time, when He 

produced the Word (Verbum notionale) distinct from Himself, as it 

were the first of creatures, and by him all other creatures. John 

refutes this by saying, And God was the Word, meaning that the 

Word already spoken of was God. He said this lest any one should 

suppose that the Word was not God, because he had said that He 

was with God. He means that the Word was with God in such 

sort that He Himself was God. 

The Arians object that the Greek word deh, i.e., God, has not the 

article in this clause as it had in the preceding clause, and the Word 

was with God (apud rm 6th). Therefore, say they, the Word was not 

true God. I reply by denying the conclusion. For the reason of 

the difference is that the word God (debt) in the preceding clause, 

with God, denotes a distinct Person, namely, the Person of the Father 

with whom the Word was. But in this latter clause it denotes not 

a Person but the essence of the Godhead common to each Person. 

For the Word is one God with the Father, so far as relates to 

Essence and Godhead, but not as regards Person. And the article 

in this place signifies a distinct Person, not the nature common to 

both. Again, the Greeks prefix the article to the subject, not the 

predicate ; and in this place God is the predicate, the Word is the 

subject. 

Observe that John in this sentence with three clauses, by the first 

clause unfolds the when of the Word : it was eternity. Secondly, 

the where of the Word, and His distinction from the Father. In 

this third clause, the essence of the Word, and His identity in 

essence with the Father. S. John unfolded this threefold sentence 

of His Gospel in the Creed which, at the bidding of the Blessed 

Virgin, he delivered to S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, as S. Gregory of 

Nyssa relates in his life. For this symbol is as follows, " There is 

one Father of the living Word, the substantial Wisdom and Power, 

and eternal Image, the perfect Father of the perfect and only begotten

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz0FvTcw4BdbThdFkX9wz9fhBeyvdAZPMKWR9AmmdwbKKLHWkqLvxtL-ePWg8b17IHOlY7qsfqpHMHHeO1FB_T2DVGItxWsnvksIalL6CgJ4U7zEB7hM9O-vfaJB5d6riFSngsf5A=w615-h900-v0

b9585181-9b6c-49a1-ba3d-323b5886751c

24 S. JOHN, c. I. 

Son. One Lord, alone from the Only One, God of God, the form 

and image of the Godhead, the efficacious Word, the comprehensive 

Wisdom by which all things were made, and the effectual power of 

the whole creation. True Son that cannot be seen, of the true 

Father that cannot be seen, incorruptible, immortal, and eternal Son 

of the incorruptible, immortal, and eternal Father. 

The same was in the beginning with God. He compendiously 

repeats and confirms this proposition of this clause by a sentence 

of a single clause. Thus, " This Word, which I have said is God, was 

in the beginning, that is, from eternity, with God." For it is difficult 

to understand how the Word can be with God, and yet the same 

be God. Therefore John writes and inculcates both together, that 

he may signify at one and the same time the unity of essence and 

the diversity of persons, and that he may teach that in the Godhead 

there is a Trinity of Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy 

Ghost. For this is the deepest and most obscure mystery of our 

faith, and the most difficult to be believed. 

Maldonatus gives a second reason for this repetition, derived from 

the third clause, the Word was God, that is to say, forasmuch as the 

Word was God, therefore it follows that He was in the beginning 

with God the Father, that is, coeternal and of one substance with 

the Father. 

S. Hilary gives a third reason {lib. i de Trin.), lest any one should 

suppose because he said the Word was God, and the same was in 

the begimiifig with God, there were therefore two Gods, one which 

was the Word, and the other with whom the Word was, as the 

Manichseans held two Principles, or Gods, one of which was the 

Creator of all things corporeal, the other the Creator of angels and 

things spiritual, John declares that the Word was so with God the 

Father as to be the same God with Him. 

All things zvere made by Him, that is, by the Word. All things 

which were not God were created by the Word. "All things, 

from an angel to a worm," says S. Augustine ; who adds, " between 

God who speaks, and the creature which was made, what is there by 

which it was made, but the Word, by whom God said, Let it be made.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwNUlgSon_5l2c1zfAhiQR68QK0cQIzdUm1uKmC826DKrK04HHFFX95U4e1zxzQ4TTR3lD2bsH967EoGYSU95pM31Gmn7CeebJG2zzEmvHHs4v9ekJfw3UWwg49JMryip10-zw-JQ=w615-h900-v0

0e8aa138-e961-4aa2-a110-c2d9f2bb526f

THE WORD THE CREATOR. 25 

and it was made. As the Apostle says, " By Him," i.e., the Word, 

"were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in 

earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, 

or principalities, or powers : all things were created by Him, and 

for Him " (Col. i. 16). 

From these words of S. John the Macedonians falsely denied that 

the Holy Ghost is God, arguing that He was made by the Word, 

and therefore that He was a creature, and not the Creator. But it 

is plain that the words refer to things created, not things uncreated, 

such as the Spirit, who is One God with the Father and the Son, 

and the Creator of all things. For if you were to take the word all 

absolutely, you might infer that the Father also had been created 

by the Word, which would be ridiculous, as S. Gregory Nazianzen 

learnedly teaches against the Macedonians (Oral, de Sp. Sand.) 

S. John does not in this place make mention of the Holy Ghost, 

because he is only treating of the generation and incarnation of the 

Word. Wherefore, after he had said that the Word was Himself 

God, that is, coeternal, and of one substance with the Father, he 

now in this third verse describes the relation of the same Word to 

all created things, asserting that they were made by Him. Then 

in the ninth and following verses he comes down to man, showing 

the relation of the Word to man. He asserts that He took upon 

Him the nature of man, that He might illuminate and save him. 

This is the scope and object of the whole passage. 

Observe that when it is said by Him, the preposition by does not 

signify an instrumental cause, or a minister, as though the Word 

were the instrument, or minister of God, by which He created all 

things, as Origen supposed, and also the Arians, but it signifies 

an original, or chief {principalem) cause, as in Prov. viii. 15, "By 

me kings reign," and 1 Cor. i. 9, " Faithful is God, by whom ye 

have been called" (Vulg.) The preposition by in this and other 

places is referred to God the Father, who is the First Cause of all 

things. And by here means that the Word with the Father is the 

original Cause of the creation of all things. So S. Chrysostom, 

Theophylact, and Euthymius on this passage, and SS- Athanasius,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzIyIZXwI9w20flO-CkMwobropreSA4u8qV09hFrcRJqKbVBq98RHpUul6kv9pf4V0NHpAvLa_gMo5HHSarWFQ1nN39aOfF4NKJGflX8PEywuP7x2nO8TOkoFh0CSbAUjDUm43lfQ=w615-h900-v0

362ae59b-4087-4dc4-be7f-5c006976343e

26 S. JOHN, C. I. 

Basil, and others against the Arians. Wherefore also S. Paul (Heb. 

i. 10) interprets Psalm cii. 26, " Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid 

the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy 

hands," of the Word, or Son. " Never, certainly, would he have said 

this," says S. Chrysostom, " unless he had believed the Son to be 

the Founder, not a minister, and that the Father and the Son were 

equal in dignity." 

You will ask, Why then does S. John use the preposition ha. {per, 

or through) instead of M, by, when he says that all things were 

made through (ha) Him ? 1. That he might signify that the Word 

proceeds from the Father, and is begotten of Him. " Lest any 

one should suppose," says S. Chrysostom, "that the Word was 

unbegotten." 

2. That he might signify that the Word is the Idea of created 

things, according to which the Father with the Son created all 

things. For an artificer makes all the works of his art by an ideal, 

or conception, or mental word, or plan. All these similitudes are 

transferred to the Divine Word, who is the Begotten but Uncreated 

Wisdom. 

And without Him was made nothing (Vulg.) Nothing : i.e., evil, 

as corruptible things, whose constant tendency is to nothingness, 

from whence they came forth, as the Manichseans say. For they 

thought that things corporeal and corruptible were not created by 

God, but by a demon, or evil god. But that this interpretation of 

the words is false and foolish is shown by the Greek for nothing 

(wit tt), not even one thing, meaning that everything, without one 

single exception, was created by the Word. So the Arabic clearly 

translates, All things were made by Him, and without Him was 

there not made anything of the things which were made. 

3. By nothing, S. Augustine understands sin : that all things were 

made by the Word, nothing, i.e., sin being excepted, the author 

of which is the devil, and an evil will, not God. But this idea is 

shown to be untenable in this place by the Greek, ohb' h, not even 

one thing. 

Which was made. Here there are three ways of pointing, and in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyB_WoxEwju3NNW7BKtIqQARTiRBXvMTvTzdEeAPNYDfuwfVOiTlpdzz4UCJ9p_1qxfwhQTmkuZ6NiZseLIHY3acVlZvfOdoLBDV0ADhPkLKipb2Re7B3oC7VlKs3vF5-VVhE6Ttw=w615-h900-v0

d4bdaffd-c719-4d45-b6c0-13e62e5124e2

LIFE IN THE WORD. 2J 

consequence a threefold interpretation and meaning. The first is, 

without Him was nothing made, which was made in Him : then the 

stop, after which begins a /new sentence, There was life, &c. So 

read and punctuate SS. Hilary and Epiphanius, and some others. 

But this reading is generally rejected as containing a manifest 

tautology. 

A second reading is, without Him was made nothing : then a full 

stop, after which a new sentence is commenced, That which was 

made in Him was life. This* is the pointing and reading of S. 

Austin, Tertullian (cont. Hermog.), S. Ambrose (lib. 3 de fide, c. 3), 

and the Latin Fathers passim. And among the Greeks are Clement 

of Alexandria (lib. 1 Pee. c. 6.) and S. Cyril in loc. S. Augus-

tine expounds as follows, "Everything made and created by the 

Word was in the same Word vitally and intellectually, before it was 

made and created." It was in the ideas and eternal plans which 

exist in the Word. It was therefore life, i.e., it lived in the mind 

and idea of the Word. S. Cyril explains differently, " Everything 

was made life in the Word, that is, it received, and continues to 

receive life, i.e., vigour and the preservation of its being, as long as 

it exists, from the Word." 

The third reading is that of the Syriac, Arabic, and Greek texts 

of S. Chrysostom, Nonnus, Euthymius, and Tertius (in catena) 

 

Without Him was nothing made that was made ; then the stop, and 

then a fresh sentence, In Him was life. This is by far the best 

reading, and in conformity with it the Bible has been corrected at 

Rome, and most of the other Latin copies. 

S. John adds this sentence against the Macedonians, who argued 

as we have seen above. As if he said, "When I say that all things 

were made by the Word, I mean, not the Holy Spirit, but only such 

things as were created and made.** 

In Him was life, Sac. Life is the thing which is most excellent, 

as death is the worst. S. John here ascribes to the Word the 

Fountain of life: for in Him "we live, and move, and have our 

being " (Acts xvii.) Hence the Greeks call their God Zeus, from tfjv, 

to live, because he breathes life into all living things. S. John's

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzoj3up1hPcyflhn7YswlTo8ADXL5KJMfc-kl_hQAum-IDxCwIL2hisvUL8hu5ZUWtgCiiphrD33v2yBPXf2h5uYGBiSUitbrwCEO1iMxxgFRFTLbYaSSErVOAklYDfIshsOuBe=w615-h900-v0

07f6e71a-9d42-4eca-abc3-06feef199a26

28 S. JOHN, c. I. 

meaning therefore is, " Our true life of grace and glory was in the 

Word as its origin and fountain. And that He might communicate 

Himself as this life and light to men, He came down to them, and 

became man. That as by the Word this macrocosm or great universe 

was created, so also by the same might the microcosm, or little 

world of man, be re-created, and called back from the death of sin 

to the life of grace and righteousness." S. John explains himself by 

adding, And the life was the light of men. In his first Epistle he 

speaks thus of the Word of Life (chap. i. ver. 2). " For the Life 

was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew 

unto you that eternal Life, which was with the Father, and was 

manifested unto us." And in chap, v., the last verse, " that we 

may know the true God, and may be in His true Son. This is the 

true God, and life eternal" (Vulg.) And this is why S. John con-

stantly calls Christ The Life. 

The Fathers expound this Life of the Word in various ways. 

1. Of Formal Life. Ln Him was Life: that is, life is the very 

substance of the Word. The Word Himself is substantial Life. So 

says OZcumenius on 1 John i. The Word Himself is essentially 

Life. For Life and to live are His very essence. 

2. In the Word is Life ideal, or exemplar, because in the Word, 

as in Idea, the eternal plans of all things exist, as S. Austin says. 

For the Word is the Idea of all creatures, but the Idea is itself the 

essence and life of God. Thus therefore the Word is the life of 

all creatures, even of things inanimate, for all live in the Word, 

inasmuch as He is all Life. 

3. In the Word is efficient natural Life, because the Word is the 

efficient Cause of all living things, and He gives them their life. To plants He gives vegetable life, to animals animal life, to men ratio?ial 

life, to angels angelic life. Jansen expounds thus, " The natural life 

of living things depends upon the Word." 

4. and last. You may here take life to mean, supernatural 

efficient Life, and explain as follows, "In the Word, as in a Fount 

and prime Cause, was our supernatural life, that is to say, of grace 

and glory 

; 

and therefore that He might impart this life to us, He

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxnIHhbCedSxcSE8V2iWrzp3YlH0QFpkN-5PlnOISsFoJCu877xPqdkLxTfU4dBXH0ERZpE-Xuj5xsEhV8dLndScH5lWerfipu8joP6PdLj3zdb63knxg3PvfYaFpex3PTU_go-cg=w615-h900-v0

a56145b6-c6d1-4223-be80-623b642c33ac

THE WORD THE LIGHT. 29 

became Incarnate, as I have before said. For supernatural life is 

twofold. It is begun by grace, by which a just man serves God in 

faith, hope, and charity, and lives the supernatural life, believing in, 

hoping in, and loving God above all things, supernaturally. The 

other supernatural life is that which is consummated in glory, 

wherein the blessed enjoy God, and are eternally beatified. There is 

an allusion to Psalm xlvi., "With Thee is the Well of Life, and in 

Thy light shall we see life." " This is," says Theodoret, " 

« With 

Thee is the Word Eternal, the fountain of life ; and in the light of the 

Holy Spirit shall we behold the light of Thy Only Begotten Son.' 

 

The light of man, by which men are spiritually illuminated through 

faith and grace. For he is speaking, not of natural and corporeal, 

but of spiritual and supernatural light, as is plain from what follows. 

The meaning is, Our life, which I have just said was in the Word, 

was this illumination of the Word, by which He has illuminated men 

with the knowledge of God and His salvation—externally, by words 

and holy examples ; internally, by heavenly light infused into the 

soul. This was why the Word was made flesh. So Clement of 

Alexandria {Exhort, ad. Gent.) says, " The Word which was with 

God appeared as a Teacher—the Word by which all things were 

made, and which, with Him who made them, gave them at the 

same time life as their Maker, and taught them to live well when 

He appeared as their Teacher, that He might hereafter, for the 

time to come, supply them with the means of living for ever." 

And the light shineth in darkness, &c. The meaning is, As the 

natural light by its illumination dispels the darkness, so likewise has 

Christ, forasmuch as He is light, done His part ; but the darkness, 

that is, men by reason of their ignorance and unbelief, have closed 

the eyes of their soul, that they should not admit this light. 

Observe, that Christ, as He is God, is the uncreated, efficient 

light : as man also He is the efficient light, because He is to men 

the Author of all wisdom, grace, and glory, not only giving them the 

natural light of reason, as Origen and Cyril explain, but still more 

as giving them the supernatural light of faith and wisdom. Where-

fore Christ is called in Mai. iv. 2, "The Sun of righteousness."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzdGeREF1ZZupRJdRV9RtB45y5klYEne7nRqHTLm4qczRvHHRM9rcKr31JhH6M9k387BNgaew_ZVy5DNKSgT0v4D8VPHd_je_2lC-pDLbol9JoARW33a2g1ktaeyYvFNGHEN7Cu=w615-h900-v0

ddbaa2a0-7c7c-4434-97a6-d60232266927

3o S. JOHN, C. I. 

Observe : Christ as man is here called light, because He chiefly 

gave light after His Incarnation. He was indeed light before, even 

from the first beginning of the universe. For as the sun, before it 

ascends above the horizon, sends forth some rays of its dawning, 

with which it gives light to the world, so likewise does Christ. 

This is what the Father says to Christ : " I have given Thee for a 

light unto the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be My salvation unto the 

ends of the earth." 

Admirably does S. Augustine say {Horn. 43), " Christ therefore 

came to give light to the eyes, because the devil had blinded them." 

And the same saint says (Epist. 120, ad. Honor), "The Son of 

God is not absent even from the minds of the wicked, although 

they see Him not, just as no light is seen when it is presented to 

the eyes of the blind." The light of the Word shines in the dark-

ness of wicked men by the light of reason, by the voices of crea-

tures, which all cry aloud that there is a Creator, and that He ought 

to be worshipped and loved. It shines by the law of nature written 

in the soul, by the New Law, by the Scriptures, by doctors and 

preachers, by holy inspirations, and by many such things. Where-

fore, the same Augustine says (Tract. 2. in Joan), "Fall not into 

sin, and this sun shall not go down upon thee. If thou shalt fall 

into sin, it will set, and darkness will fall upon thee." " If thou 

wilt see light, be thou also thyself light. But if thou lovest dark-

ness, and the lusts of darkness, then will they overshadow thee, yea, 

make thee blind." 

Observe in holy Scripture, and especially in S. John, both in his 

Gospel and his Epistles, the faith and grace of Christ are compared 

to light, and sin to darkness, on account of many apposite analo-

gies between them. For light is heavenly, and is the most noble, 

the swiftest and most pure of natural things. It is impassible and 

most active. It cannot be defiled by any impurities, even though 

they be commingled with it. It brings warmth, glory, and joy. It 

causes all things to be seen, and brings life and power to every living 

thing. Such also is God, and His grace. The contrary to all this 

is found in sin, whose symbol is darkness. Besides all this, grace

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzDbkuH2HO30s2X3B0DCIQAOOlIPTHm_-b68d3IwCHbLu7xZr86o7dVPRe_W8fypb-vNNrd5vblfMiBwUPZZ8rGmtI5z82bevZ6Jg43P9jMLL-Nw2rVhfCZQfrpKKzPlwAGBB_ybw=w615-h900-v0

e04170f9-8fbb-4218-8112-d50994901c88

THE WITNESS OF JOHN. 3 

 

leads to everlasting light and glory, sin to the lowest and most 

extreme darkness. 

Comprehended it not: Greek, oh xar'e\a.l3iv, i.e., as Vatablus translates, 

did not receive it. The meaning is, so great was the blindness and 

depravity of unbelieving and wicked men, that when the Light 

offered itself to them of its own accord, they would not embrace, 

nor receive it ; for they closed their eyes that they might not 

admit it; for "their works were evil," as S. John says (iii. 19). 

There was a man sentfrom God, &c. He was sent, as Luke says, 

(iii. 1), 

" in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Csesar : and 

the Word of God came to him in the wilderness." " Thou, then," 

says Chrysostom, " when thou understandest that he was sent from 

God, do not think that anything merely human is being announced, 

but that all is Divine. He does not declare anything of his own, 

but the secrets of Him who sends him. Therefore he, John, is 

called an angel, that is, a messenger. It is the office of a mes-

senger to know nothing of himself." 

The same came for a witness, &c. Namely, that he might bear 

witness that Jesus is the true Light of the world, and that we must 

look for, and ask of Him all the light of faith, and all the know-

ledge of salvation. 

Observe that in Greek the article is prefixed to light, as it were 

that light meaning the spiritual and Divine light, that which shineth 

of itself, and is essentially light, and the source of all enlightenment, 

which is as it were a Divine Sun, in respect of which John the 

Baptist was but as the moon, or the day-star. For as the morning 

star goes before the sun, so did John precede Christ the Sun of 

righteousness. The meaning is as follows—Inasmuch as the light 

of the Godhead was hidden in the humanity of Christ, as in a lan-

tern dark and shaded, so that men discerned it not, therefore did 

God send John, that he might uncover and make this light manifest, 

and testify that Jesus was the very Son of God, the Teacher and 

Redeemer of the world. For, as Paul saith (1 Tim. vi. 16), God 

"inhabiteth the unapproachable light, whom no man hath seen, 

nor can see." And again, the Son "is the splendour of His glory,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyBSviWxScPGFUolM7NyrNMAfOHtHnbVi8JWWnXDpxQ5CZAjG9NB6vPWdvn66eKBPHi5YquCKfwP3z9KDXsopbgpsJ-mH13p0FHIatoDvjYVfjH5K7IHPHCAkJf8e0EfiODzD780w=w615-h900-v0

fec9a332-35d3-49e5-ae97-49d6e6ad6036

32 S. JOHN, C. I. 

and the form of the substance " of God the Father (Heb. i. 3, 

Vulg.) 

And again, the same is " the brightness of eternal light, and the 

spotless mirror of the majesty of God, and the image of His good-

ness " (Wisd. vii. 26). 

That all men through him might believe : that is, believe in the 

Light, and so be justified and saved. Through him, namely, John, 

who as it were with his finger pointed out Christ, saying : " Behold 

the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world." 

He was not that Light, &c. The Jews and the Scribes thought, 

because of the preaching and heavenly life of John in the wilderness, 

that he was himself the Light, i.e., Christ. John the Evangelist by 

these words destroys such an idea. He was not that Light. That 

is, he was not the Saviour of the world, but only His witness, who 

received all his own light of knowledge and prophecy and grace 

from Christ. Wherefore in v. 35, he is called " a burning and a 

shining lamp." "But," says Origen. "he did not burn by his own 

fire, nor shine by his own light." 

That was the true Light, &c. Not John, but Christ Himself. You 

will ask, Why is Christ called the true Light ? or, as the Greek forcibly 

expresses it, rb §Zic, rb akriMv, the Light the true 2 I answer, first, 

because the Word is the original, uncreated, and essential Light 

 

but John the Baptist and the rest of the saints are light only by 

participation and communication from the Word. Wherefore, in 

comparison with Christ they do not deserve the name of light, for-

asmuch as they are infinitely surpassed by His brightness. Christ 

therefore alone is Light, and alone deserves the name of light. In 

the same way the name of God is Jehovah, or He who is, because 

He is the true, essential, eternal, and infinite Being, but all other 

things derive from Him a spark of being. Wherefore, in comparison 

with God they have but an imperfect and mutilated existence, so as 

rather to seem to exist, than actually to be. For they are as it were 

the shadow of that infinite Being, which fills immensity, that is, God, 

who truly is the only Being, or He who is. 

2. Christ is the true Light of the world, because His faith and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxnMeDd86DREgQdoIoIqQTY-LXaC-GCZ0nouQYkvdIHKIZJSc32fvQm5BDG9xE6wTrLs2tOCql6jkV9Frbz7iXegvjtFsmW14rWuedWVT5WyOB65z9SSlhUckfiVzUSLFLsqsOsgQ=w615-h900-v0

34300f09-c037-497f-a277-7a151c496ed3

THE TRUE LIGHT. 33 

doctrine are opposed to the errors and false doctrines of Gentile 

philosophers, heretics, and atheists. For the true Light is that 

which is pure, sincere, genuine, which has nothing feigned, nor 

obscure, nor imperfect. 

3. Because Christ illuminates us far more truly and perfectly 

than any corporeal light does, therefore spiritual light alone deserves 

the name of light, and corporeal light is only, as it were, a shadow 

of it. In a similar way, and with a like meaning, Christ says 

(xv. 1), Iam the true Vine : and in vi. 55, He calls Himself the true 

Bread. In like manner that which is perfect, and of surpassing 

excellency, is often called true. 

4. Christ is the true Light because He most fully and most 

widely diffuses His light in every direction. Therefore everywhere 

is He the true Light. For, as S. John adds by way of explana-

tion, He lighteneth every man that cometh into this world." For all 

the saints and the faithful, how great soever, and how many 

soever they are, which have been, and are, and shall be, from the 

beginning of the world, have derived all their light of faith and 

grace from Christ. But John the Baptist was a light only to Judea, 

a little corner of the world, and that only in the days of Herod. In 

like manner it has been with the rest of the saints. 

Lastly, John and the rest were only able to teach their hearers 

exteriorly, and with the outward voice, but they could not directly, 

nor of themselves, illuminate the soul. But Christ does both. 

The voice only strikes upon the outward ears, but Christ, by His 

grace, both strikes upon, and illuminates the soul. 

This is why Christ is continually called by John, the Truth. 

And Christ says in the 14th chapter : " Iam the Way, the Truth, and 

the Life." For in Christ there is all truth, and that fourfold : there 

is the truth of being, or existence, the truth of the soul, the truth 

of word, and the truth of deed. 

Truth lies hid, as the true Deity lay hid, in the humanity of 

Christ. Yet cannot it lie hid for ever. As Cicero says {pro Ccelio), 

" O mighty power of truth, which by itself easily defends itself 

against the wit of men, against craft and cunning, and against 

VOL. IV. c

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwxqelNR8unkS2OUzH-xUFUpwbmhatNDg2PwHQtyJWTxSkovgumQvcoWp8eBRYIWgWd9KkJAK-Ncr4lqJx8VRPKOtwWScPEJuced7XmmEdRAKPGt3K-qYmn7Cty7wObSS9jZ2OYOw=w615-h900-v0

4972fddd-5186-4bfb-8a3e-3648bbad446d

34 S. JOHN, c. I. 

every ensnaring device." Wherefore, the truth may be oppressed, 

but can never be extinguished, just as the sun may be obscured by 

the clouds, but by-and-by it disperses the clouds by the force 

of its rays, and shines out brightly. Such is truth, and such too 

is Christ. 

Lighteneth every man : that is, as far as Christ is concerned. 

Wherefore, let those who are not enlightened, ascribe the fault 

to themselves, because they will not receive the light of faith and 

grace which Christ offers them. Thus does the sun give light so 

far as he is concerned to all that are in the house. But if any one 

shut the window, and prevent the sun from shining through it, this 

will be his own fault, not the fault of the sun. S. John here alludes 

to the sun, which gives light to the whole world. So S. Chrysostom, 

Cyril, Euthymius. This may be gathered from what preceded, 

the light shineth in darkness, &c. This is said of the supernatural 

light of grace, though S. Cyril explains it of the natural light of 

reason. For God has given to every man the light of reason, that 

by it he may know what is good, what is evil, what to embrace, and 

what to shun. 

That cometh into this world, i.e., born in this world. This is 

a Hebraism. The Greek igxdfittot, coming, may be taken to be in 

grammatical agreement with light, so that the meaning would be, 

the light coming into this world, that is, Christ born in this world, 

enlightens, so far as He is concerned, every man. So S. Augustine 

{lib. i. de pec. mer. c. 25). So Christ says (xii. 46), / am come a Light into the world. But almost all the Greek and Latin inter-

preters take coming to be in the accusative, as agreeing with man. Ver. 10.—He was in the world, &c. The Word, or Son of God, 

was in the world. For He as God was in the world by His essence 

and presence, and power, from the beginning, preserving and governing it by His providence. So S. Paul says (Acts xvii. 27). So SS. Chrysostom, Austin, and all the other Greek and Latin Fathers. 

Otherwise Maldonatus, who refers the passage to the Incarnation. 

But the Evangelist is about to treat of the Incarnation in the 

verses following.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwp5NGwrWxWOuai5OAwVn8St3jLdHvfpZrLdWYIrgjldh7cNMzHBwzOhnlLUW6mjXOJegRV6k1Bjb-1b14Msh-X2nCsD3gf6mLmRN130T5fZJ8M8zIe30SLD-gS3fzjM08pmCix_A=w615-h900-v0

b4237cde-dddc-4901-a74e-f9eeb70e604a

THE WORLD KNEW NOT THE WORD. 35 

And the world was made by Him. And is here put for assuredly, 

or, more emphatically, for because. The meaning is—Therefore was 

the Word in the world, because the world was created, and is still 

preserved, and exists by Him. For the Word is the foundation, 

yea, as it were, the very soul of the world, even as Plato, though 

a heathen, thought. Wisely Philo saith, " It is the property of the 

Creator to bless, of the creature to give thanks." 

And the world knew Him not. John marks the ingratitude of the 

world, because it knew not its Maker, whom it always had present, 

even the Word, or Son of God. Moreover, there is a play upon 

the word world. For (1.) by world is properly understood the 

universe, and all the things that are therein, all which were made by 

the Word. But when it is added, and the world knew Him not, by 

the world is understood inhabitants of the world, that is to say, men 

given up to the world, who knew not the Author of the world. So 

SS. Augustine and Chrysostom. 

Observe here, that by the works of Nature, it may be naturally 

known that God is One in Essence, but not Three in Person, and 

consequently the Word cannot in this way be known as the Word. 

John therefore here blames worldly men, not because they did not 

recognise the Word qua Word, but because they did not recognise Him 

as God, the Creator of the world, by means of His workmanship. 

And this affords a reply to Maldonatus, who argues that John is 

speaking in these words of the Incarnation of the Word. But we 

answer, that they did not know the Word as the Word, or the 

Person of the Son. Indeed, many have not from the works of God 

in the world even recognised God as its Creator. I allow that some 

men, both patriarchs and prophets, knew the Word, or Son of 

God, and prophesied concerning Him. But they knew this by a 

special revelation of God, not by His works in the world. John 

therefore is here deploring the blindness and ignorance of human 

infirmity, since the Fall, because with faith it lost the knowledge of 

its Creator and Saviour, that is, the Word. 

He came unto His own, &c. By His own Augustine, Cyril, Chry-

sostom, &c, understand the Jews, for they were the peculiar people

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz89ziIRJ5WcvXtniKNBl3gm4yfPYD3YfbH8H-nHR_VU2M18nvmn_CfnIWuLN3PzwDYyUfZYoqCgkO-0O_MyPIbxDhsTZJjeUR3ks5RAsnc4GzKGZzmEdvkBlCPsUgGXpLiA4iL=w615-h900-v0

cd12860b-57e3-4755-975f-131feb503553

2,6 S. JOHN, C I. 

of God. But by His own you may better understand the world, and 

all the inhabiters thereof. For S. John says the same thing, and 

after his manner repeats and enforces it, as I have already said : 

thus, " He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the 

world knew Him not." Hear S. Cyril at the Council of Ephesus, 

" The Only Begotten came unto His own, especially the Israelites, 

when He became man incarnate." 

And His own—not all. but many, for some did receive Jesus as 

the Christ, such as the twelve apostles, and the seventy-two dis-

ciples. But these were few compared with the rest of the Jews who 

did not receive Him. 

Ver. 12. 

 

But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to 

become the sons of God, even to those who believe in His name: i.e., on 

Himself, for the name signifies the Person of Christ. The pronoun 

who must be referred, not to sons of God, but to as many. This is 

plain from the Greek o'i, which is masculine, and must refer to oeoi, 

as many, or whosoever, not to rtxvu (children, or sons), which is 

neuter. The meaning is, "to as many as have received Christ, 

that is, to all who believe in His name, He has given power to 

become sons of God." And so S. John explains himself (i Ep. v. i), 

" Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God." 

Power, Greek, sgovaiae, i.e., dignity, authority, right, that indeed 

by this very thing, that they receive Christ by faith and by the sac-

rament of faith, i.e., baptism, or certainly by faith formed by love, 

which includes the wish for, or desire of baptism, they become at 

the same time justified, and they are made and are (for the Greek 

ymetlai means both), the adopted sons of God by participation and 

grace, even as Christ is the natural Son of God by His own Divine 

Hypostasis. 

Wherefore Clement of Alexandria {Adhort. ad Gent.) says, that 

Christ by His Incarnation changed earth into heaven, and of men 

made angels, yea gods, and therefore that He is the beautiful 

charioteer who drives to heaven, to a blessed immortality, the 

chariot, whose two horses are the Jews and the Gentiles. 

Therefore the word t^ovaia, power, signifies both the dignity of the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwIfMZoRkOH3UpAUI9Ov41fisSklQBKrs7TEcWmgSccbcBmuhUhBnuxgf5adpD8e1FvDb6EBf4sIIwG9FpU3izJXm7F6k1UnigrkT5n_5aCxtNPSLhVyLuOSbIhPsce0rsbWhO-lw=w615-h900-v0

9ab63429-2cb7-440c-b603-c80fe9d1db90

CO-OPERATION OF MANS WILL. 37 

Divine adoption, and the liberty of our will freely to embrace it, 

For He does not say, He made them to be sons of God, but He gave 

them power, i.e., free will to become sons of God, if, that is, they will 

freely to believe in, and obey Him. Calvin and Beza deny this, but 

Augustine asserts it (de Spirit, et Lit. c. 31). "For," he says, "we 

call this power, where the faculty of performing is added to the will. 

Wherefore every one is said to have in his power that which if he 

wills to do, he does, which if he wills not to do, he does not." S. 

Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, Bede, and others, assert the same 

thing continually. Hear S. Chrysostom, " Like as if fire shall touch 

metalliferous earth, it immediately turns it into gold, so much more 

does baptism make those whom it washes to be gold instead of clay. 

For the Holy Ghost, as it were fire, in that same hour that He 

enters our hearts, takes away our likeness to earth, and makes us to 

have a heavenly likeness new and bright, and shining as in a furnace. 

And why did He not say, He made us to become the sons of God? It 

was that he might show that we have need of great diligence, that 

we may keep pure and undefiled the mark of adoption stamped upon 

us by baptism. Moreover because no one is able to take away this 

power from us unless we shall first take it away from ourselves." 

You will say, faith equally with adoption is the gift of God, there-

fore it cannot be at the disposal of man's will. I reply by denying 

the inference. For God does not bestow faith, hope, and charity 

and other virtues and gifts of His upon men against their will, or as 

unreasoning beings, but as reasonable creatures, co-operating freely 

with Him. For this is what S. John here says, God has given power 

to become sons of God to those who freely receive Christ by faith 

and obedience, excluding those who are unwilling to receive Him. 

" Power is given that they who believe in Him may become sons of 

God, since this very thing is given that they may believe in Him," 

says S. Augustine (lib. 1. contr. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 3). And this is given 

by God, when He so by His grace illuminates and influences the 

soul of man as freely herself to consent and believe. 

To become the sons of God. How this is wrought, and how great 

is the dignity of this adoption, I have shown on Hosea i. 10, upon

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxI_HC5ZmKYaGeVOEz2fq3uJWk2mRufHym_BP0cf7s1CCDO0qPWhknWG96j16FKvrL7CA-RNrRHAHuWR7EXog-bH61QYj-mK90dhGK_YMpPT9_ZSWz03JAlVTCt9tJBPeouUa3b0w=w615-h900-v0

3ac8b0cb-8525-4135-badb-d63d5333385d

38 S. JOHN, c. I. 

the words, " It shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living 

God." Wherefore Cyril saith, "Let us rise to our supernatural 

dignity through Christ,—not indeed that we should be sons of God 

by nature as He is, but that, through likeness to Him, we may be 

sons of God by grace." 

Ver. 13.— Which were born, not of bloods (Greek) nor of the will 

(Arabic, appetite) of the flesh, &c. S. John here gives an antithesis 

between human generation and Divine, and demonstrates the supe-

riority of the latter. For (1.) he says that the former is of bloods, 

which is a Hebraism for blood, meaning the blood of man, produced 

by food. 

2. He asserts that it is of the will, i.e., the concupiscence of 

the flesh. This is what is elsewhere called flesh and blood, in which 

the will, or concupiscence of man, consists. He explains the will of 

the flesh to be the will of man. That is, the will, or appetite, or 

concupiscence of the flesh is the will, or concupiscence, for the 

generative act, which the carnal appetite desires. 

On the other hand, the Divine generation of the sons of God is 

not of blood, nor of the will and concupiscence of the flesh, but is 

of God, that is, of the will, predestination, and love of God. Again, 

of God means of the Spirit and grace of God, by which the mind 

of man, beforetime carnal, is regenerated and justified, and so a 

man becomes spiritual, just, and holy, a friend, yea, a son of God. 

3. Of God, because in this regeneration of man, God not only 

gives him His grace and love and all other virtues, but also Him-

self, that a man may be truly justified, and may have the Spirit really 

dwelling in his soul, yea, may have the whole Trinity, and so may 

become Divine, a son and heir of God, and a joint-heir with Christ. 

Ver. 14. 

 

And the Word was made flesh, &c. Thus it is literally 

translated in the Syriac, Persian, Egyptian, and Ethiopic versions. 

But the Arabic has, The Word was made a body. For flesh here 

means the human body, and so man. From this the heresiarch Apol-

linaris denied that the Word assumed a human soul and mind. He asserted that in their place were the mind and Divinity of the Divine 

Word. So says S. Augustine {Hares. 55). For the faith teaches

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz8mGV2Czrzud2Nxe_Bcfgm9IV6pyE9WGOE5PIpPK_nNcpRukdSgTI-f78pmNSEaUBCiQr91K3w4Yl4RCZezZl6yFfa2uBRjiTfNPk7EoHZn7rnl5vZsDOFXlhqNQ_vqwE2JIisGw=w615-h900-v0

ab36f307-ce7e-4b90-a3ee-29f401ddbd67

UNION OF THE TWO NATURES. 39 

that the Word assumed as well true human flesh as a true reasonable 

soul, and therefore had two perfect and uncommingled natures, the 

Divine and the human, and consequently possessed two wills, and 

a twofold mind, the Divine and the human. So that these two 

natures with their attributes subsist in the one only Person of the 

Word, in which Person, but not in His nature, this union has 

taken place, as the Council of Ephesus defines against Nestorius, 

and the Council of Chalcedon against the Eutychians. 

From this unity of Person there follows, as theologians teach, 

a participation of the attributes (communicatio idiomatum) of both 

natures, so that in Christ whatsoever is an attribute of man as man, 

the same may be predicated of His Divinity, and conversely. Foi 

example, we truly say, this Man, namely, Jesus, is God, is Almighty, 

is the Creator, is from eternity. And conversely we say that God, 

or the Son of God, truly suffered, was crucified, and died. For 

indeed there is one and the same Divine Person in Christ, God and 

man, who underwent all these things, although in accordance with 

two different natures. For actions and passions inhere in concrete 

individuals, or persons, in whatsoever nature they subsist. Hear S. 

Austin (in Dial. 65. qucest. ad Oros. qu. 4). " The Word was made 

flesh, not being changed by the flesh ; so that He did not cease to 

be what He was, but began to be what He had not been. For He 

assumed flesh, He did not convert Himself into flesh. By that 

flesh, as a part for the whole, we understand the whole man, that is, 

flesh and reasonable soul. And as the first man had died both in 

the flesh and in the soul, so also it behoved that he should be 

quickened both in flesh and in soul, through the Mediator between 

God and man, the Man Christ Jesus." 

It follows (2.) that the Word was made flesh, not in the way in 

which water became wine when it was changed into wine, nor as 

food becomes our flesh, when it is changed into it, nor yet again as 

gold becomes a statue, by the addition to the material of gold of 

the accidental form of a statue, but after a similar manner to that 

in which soul and flesh being united become one man. So S. 

Athanasius in the Creed : " One, not by confusion of substance, but

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxcdPQR7VQDAc_K-C7L8jcmtqaTSdUw3w117PQXLXvGP_6HgN-QB5eU_blEkiLZuGfZtGzeVPh465F1G7TwginXSsdtxYFfpbuDiS0cPHkb_NvtUcw1B3Z1Vv5rP4whdV3Zl2-G9g=w615-h900-v0

fa23e56c-61a6-49cc-b2c4-f5fdf5731401

40 S. JOHN, C. 1. 

by unity of Person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one 

man, so God and man is one Christ." 

But man is one essentialiter ; Christ is one personaliter. Or again, 

it is after the manner in which a man is clothed by the putting on 

of a garment. So a new substance was added to the Word, as it 

were a garment, but substantially, not accidentally : for the Son of 

God clothed Himself with the substance of flesh, and of our nature, 

and joined, and most closely united it to Himself substantially in 

the same Hypostasis of the Word. 

Flesh here, as often in Scripture, signifies by synecdoche the whole 

man. The Word was made flesh, i.e., the Son of God became man. 

In a similar manner, S. John might have said, The Word of God 

became a soul. But he preferred to sa.y flesh rather than soul, that 

he might show how great was the kindness of God, that for love of 

us He emptied Himself. For God was made flesh, that we instead 

of flesh that was most corrupt through concupiscence and sin might 

become as it were Divine, and sons of God, and akin to God Him-

self. "The Word," says S. Cyril (epist. 8. ad Nestor.), "uniting to 

Himself, according to His substance, flesh animated by a reasonable 

soul, was ineffably made man." 

We will now comment upon each word of this passage singly. 

And: this word conjoins the sentence with those preceding it. 

It has partly an historical, partly a causative force. Historically— that Eternal Word, whose generation I have declared, and of 

whom I have said, that He was with God, and was God, was in the 

time divinely appointed made flesh, for He assumed our flesh of the 

Blessed Virgin, and when He was born of her was called Jesus. 

So that and in this place may stand for therefore. As thus, l^hei-efore 

was the Word made flesh, that He might make us to be the sons of 

God. Therefore S. Augustine says, " Let us not be amazed, or 

astounded at such grace, and let it not seem a thing incredible to 

us, that men should be born of God, when He asks you to consider 

that God was born of men." 

The Word the Greek has the article, and is emphatic—that 

Divine and Eternal Word, of whom we have been thus far speak-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzE1Fbj8RmfkXF5jISKipVYh0mYPaxtDFgk_DAGBg6hvwL1_2WdJLtWa5iqhRXK5UpbA6zuWOPu1Vphhcvg2FTH-ULLRFGWBtKN7KEnQEDn4iEUhnASvQ8Q3RI5BJ10_hcdgMn4_Q=w615-h900-v0

3292f897-e1d2-4483-a34d-541966cbb4d7

AGAINST THE EUTYCHIANS. 4* 

ing. Wherefore S. Athanasius (Episl. ad Epictetum) cites Gal. iii. 

as a parallel passage, and says, " For as Christ is called a curse, 

not because He Himself was made a curse, but because for us He 

bore the curse, so is He said to be made flesh, not because He 

Himself was changed into flesh, but because He assumed flesh 

for us." 

The Word was made flesh is explained by the same parallel of 

a curse by S. Gregory Nazianzen (Epist. ad Cledon.), S. Flavian, 

Patriarch of Antioch, S. Ignatius, S. Irenaeus, S. Hippolytus, 

S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nyssen, Amphilochius, and 

others, who are cited by Theodoret in a Dialogue entitled Immuta-

bilis. In this he confutes those Eutychians who said that the 

Word was changed by His Incarnation, and transformed into flesh. 

He confutes others who said that flesh was changed into the Word, 

and that the Word absorbed the flesh in the same way that the sea 

swallows up a stream which flows into it. These he confutes in his 

Dialogue Inconfusus. He confutes a third section of the Eutychians, 

who said that the Godhead in Christ suffered and was crucified, in a 

third Dialogue called Impassibilis. 

Lastly, listen to S. Cyril in the Council of Ephesus, "By the 

WordyfcA the whole man must be understood, as in the place where 

it is said, ' All flesh shall see the salvation of God,' and ' I com-

muned not with flesh and blood' (Gal. i) Soul is understood in 

similar way, as ' Seventy-five souls of our fathers went down into 

Egypt ' (Acts vii.) As often therefore as we hear that the Word was 

madeflesh, we understand that He became a man of flesh and blood." 

S. Cyril elsewhere repeats this, and adds, " Not according to trans-

ference, or conversion, or commutation, as though there were a 

transformation into the nature of flesh, nor as having commingling, 

nor consubstantiation, &c." 

Flesh, i.e., man. To the Word he opposes flesh, as it were the 

lowest to the highest, what is wretched to what is blessed, what is 

most vile, weak, and impure, to what is most glorious. For what is 

more vile, weak, and filthy than human flesh ? And yet the Word 

of God deigned to stoop to such flesh as this, from love of us. This

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzj9z3i-ykX69RRevxNL4a7Wm6gKM3sYH5qthdyVCiYwAEyLQ5wk8OXCz4hozLS6idGa9LFfSY0WztXhYgTgcKy1iq3kRFFlqLhrRd_e1FF3TgwjOF0KaZ4mmcbmrrY8o0l-zR1kQ=w615-h900-v0

9a1cf46f-3a3d-4c63-8132-e26797ff7c81

42 S. TOHN, C. I. 

is that p//.av05w;j7a and ecstasy of love which the Apostle celebrates 

(Titus iii. 4). Hear S. Bernard (Serm. 3. de Nativ.) : " Forasmuch 

as He was in the beginning with God, He dwelt in the unapproach-

able light, and none could comprehend Him. For ' who hath found 

out the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor?' 

'The carnal mind perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God,' 

but now even the carnal man may receive them, because the Word 

has been madeflesh. O man who art in the flesh, to thee is manifested 

that wisdom which afore was hid. Behold, now is it drawn forth 

from its hiding-place, and introduces itself into the very senses of 

thy flesh. After a fleshly manner, that I may so say, is it preached 

unto thee. Flee from voluptuousness, for death has been placed 

beside the gate of pleasure." 

The Word then was made flesh, i.e., man, as subsisting (existentem), 

not as a person {subsistentem). For He assumed the very nature of 

man, but not the person of a man. Nor indeed was the Person of 

the Word made the person of a man, for this were impossible. The 

Word assumed the essence and substance of man, not human per-

sonality. A human nature was assumed by Him in that very 

moment of time in which it was formed by the Holy Ghost, who 

came first that it, namely, the humanity, should not subsist as a 

person ; and He conjoined the same human nature to Himself in 

the unity of His Divine Person, and made it to subsist in the same. 

Wherefore the Humanity of Christ subsists not in itself, but in the 

Person of the Word. 

Was made: not that the Word was changed into flesh, or flesh 

into the Word, for, as S. Chrysostom says, " far from that immortal 

nature is transmutation." For how could flesh become God, that 

is, how could the creature become the Creator ? Neither does it 

mean that the Word was madeflesh, that is, became a man, in such a 

sense that He assumed not only human nature, but a human person, 

as Nestorius thought. " It is not as if," says Theophylact, " the Word had found a man endued with virtues, and united him to Him-

self," as the Holy Ghost united Himself to the prophets, the angel 

Raphael to Tobias. But it is that He united the nature of man to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwZA274MXqqFl9iq0VqenXJWbIyASYdFBlu6xYWh3e9ECFRd00fI-WaGxFpX_2xc48Z3eYv7cd13ADa3hnuqC61Qxxyz7NrqJDfqVNJSrjX8-pB6aU5FDPNFXElga00GvGmsCqY=w615-h900-v0

c6ceacf8-f6ff-40ec-b43c-18126a2199f9

THE INCARNATION. 43 

His own Hypostasis, and caused that the man Jesus should subsist in 

the same Hypostasis as God the Word, God the Son. Moreover, 

the Word was made flesh, not in imagination, nor appearance, nor 

fancy, as the Manichgeans maintained, but in the very truth and 

reality of actual fact. The Word was made man, I say, not by Him-

self alone, but by the whole Trinity. For all the Holy Trinity was 

the efficient cause of the Incarnation of the Word, but still in such a 

manner that the Hypostatic Union was with the sole Person of the 

Word, not with that of the Father, or the Holy Ghost : and the Son 

alone became man. " For the Trinity itself made the Word only 

to be flesh," says S. Fulgentius (lib. defide ad Petr.) 

The Word therefore clothed with flesh was as the sun vested with 

a cloud, or as fire burning iron, or as a burning coal, as S. Cyril 

says. Wherefore its type and symbol is a carbuncle, as I have said 

on Apoc. xxi. 29. Again, it was like unto a pearl in a shell, or as 

lightning in a cloud, or as gold in a furnace, or an angel in a body. 

Moreover S. Augustine says (lib. 15. de Trin. c. 11), "As our speech 

becomes a voice, and yet is not changed into a voice, so the 

Word of God being made flesh was not changed into flesh." 

I have said more on the subject of the Incarnation in the first 

chapter of S. John's Epistle. Among other things I have shown that 

it was with this end and object in view, that the Word which before, 

as God, was our Father, might become, as it were, our Mother, 

through the Humanity which He assumed. And I added from 

Damascene, that God assumed human nature, that He might unite 

the whole world to Himself by it, and, as it were, make it godlike. 

And dwelt among us : Greek, iaxqvuasv, i.e., tabernacled amongst us for 

a short time, like a guest and a foreigner in a strange land. For 

He was a citizen and an inhabitant, and the Lord of Heaven and 

Paradise. As it is said in Jeremiah (xiv. 8), " Wherefore wilt thou 

be as a sojourner in the land, and as a wayfarer turning aside to 

lodge?" Christ therefore wished to teach us by His own example 

that this world is, as it were, a guest-house, but that heaven is 

our country, which we ought to strive to attain, despising earthly 

things.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyQrFw58upW1zY_0EWV4ygzhpNiIxIfD0ZLWP1WUBRP62okAmgXzpjsks9P7lG4rG4so4dH_x4NFWuwubgIKAmvNUycpu4NwvBZmYkL9uEnteK-T-AV_pdGEg9Z7d-5coLyyKyj=w615-h900-v0

7fea526e-6e63-4876-a73c-91cd1a0c4431

44 s 

- J°HN > 

c 

-

L 

SS. Chrysostom and Cyril explain a little differently. Among us, 

i.e., in us, in our nature, namely, in the Humanity which He assumed, 

that He might redeem us. S. Chrysostom gives the reason. " The 

Word constructed a holy temple for Himself, and by means of it 

introduced from heaven a way in which we should spend our life." 

Andwe have seen His glory : Greek, Ikaad^ida,, we have gazed upon, 

as on a new and wonderful spectacle in a theatre, that the Word 

veiled in flesh might indeed show us the glory of His Godhead 

by means of miracles and Divine wisdom. Thus the Apostle says 

(i Cor. iv. 9), "We were made a spectacle (Greek, a theatre) to the 

world, to angels and to men." Listen to S. Austin, " By that His 

nativity He made an eye-salve, whereby the eyes of our heart might 

be cleansed. No man could see His glory unless he would be 

healed by the humility of the flesh. Flesh had blinded thee : flesh 

healeth thee. Thus cometh the physician that by the flesh He 

may heal the vices of the flesh." 

The glory as of the Only Begotten. The meaning is, we have seen 

the glory of Christ, being such and so great as became the Only 

Begotten Son : or that it was such as might manifest Him to be the 

Only Begotten Son of God. For to Him, as S. Basil says, hath 

God the Father given all His glory, all His substance, as parents 

are wont to leave all their inheritance to an only begotten son. 

This glory of Christ did S. John with his fellows behold in the 

Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, in His glorious Resurrection, 

in His Ascension, and in His Divine life and miracles. There-

fore the word as here denotes not similitude, but reality. So S. 

Chrysostom says, "The word as in this place is an expression not 

of similarity, but of confirmation, and certain definition." And 

Theophylact says, " We behold His glory, not such as that which 

Moses had, nor glory such as that with which the cherubim and 

seraphim appeared to the prophet, but glory such as that which 

became the Only Begotten of the Father, the glory which appertains 

to Him by His nature." 

Moreover, the glory of the Godhead of Christ shone through the 

flesh which He assumed, as through a veil, as Euthymius says, who

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzPr0eQE1-IlTpvXwaX6G4hB7CQPOF8D9RVvwh4GkbbzENiUZUKdtMWvSO1R3obkMKj541-oFomS8cDSFxIabXO4mcMxSNCgXTuZR62bHwvknKufnuYOBgE0iLFVVH5oAKzk6sv2g=w615-h900-v0

b5434049-4e0d-4ea5-9b9a-49e56aaeaee8

FULNESS OF GRACE. 45 

further adds, " What was that grace of the Word ? Surely it was 

the performance of miracles such as had never been beheld before 

 

it was His bright and supernatural Transfiguration, the preter-

natural darkening of the sun at the time of His Passion, the fearful 

rending of the veil, the terrible earthquake, the rending of the rocks, 

the opening of the graves, the raising of the dead, and that which 

is the chief of all, wonderful beyond speech or thought, the Resur-

rection of the Lord." 

Of the Father. This is added, saith S. Bernard, "because Christ 

hath brought to us from the Father's heart everything that is 

paternal, that fear itself might perceive nothing in the Son of God 

but what is sweet and fatherly towards the human race." More 

loftily, and more literally, says St. Cyril, " That supernatural grace is 

ever firm and immutable, ever the same, ever equally full of its own 

dignity. Wherefore, although the Word was made flesh, He was 

not overcome by the infirmity of the flesh, nor did He fall from His 

ancient majesty and omnipotence, because He became man. For 

we saw, he says, the glory of Christ from God, more lofty than the 

glory of creatures, that every one who is in possession of his senses 

might confess that it could belong to no other than to the Only 

Begotten Son of God." 

Full ofgrace and truth. Erasmus and Cajetan join these words to 

what follows, and refer them to John the Baptist. They connect 

and translate as follows, John being full of grace and truth bears 

witness ofHim, namely, of Jesus, that He is the Christ. They support 

their view by saying that the Greek forfull is wkygris in the nominative 

masculine. But this pointing and translation is opposed to all the 

Fathers, and the perpetual consent of the Church, contrary, too, to 

the pointing of the Greek, Latin, Syriac and Arabic versions, which 

place a full stop after truth. It is moreover inconsistent with what 

follows, for John, explaining how Christ was full of grace and truth, 

subjoins, of His fulness have all we received. The Greek forfull being 

in the nominative, is inconclusive, as well because many MSS. have 

vXtjon in the accusative, and others have a-X^jj in the margin, as also 

because the preceding words, And we have seen His glory, the glory, &c,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwiX7uRKW2-7nglUIgaDkyenh3J0KIoZT83yqNXJ8Ef7s4Zvl-V4JwNqZE98ecl2TnuMxG_zij50H4y0Aw1Ao4l0wlKeauHVUaPfLHgK6IjQa_89wGcl8aEPnIRd-zvieO0DbA2Kg=w615-h900-v0

9bb869f1-acef-4c3d-bed9-86ed60e7121f

46 S. JOHN, C. I. 

should be read as in a parenthesis. For vrXfyns, the nominative refers 

to X070;, meaning, the Word was madeflesh, being full of grace and 

truth. There is a reference to human speech, the greatest commen-

dation of which is, when it is gracious and true. So also the Divine 

Word, not merely as He is in Himself, but also as He became 

flesh, carried with Him most excellent grace, as it were in a 

fountain-head, and was most abundantly endowed by God with 

every gift of grace, both in word and deed, according as it was 

said, "And all marvelled at the words of grace which proceeded 

out of His mouth" (Luke iv. 22). The same Word made flesh was 

full of truth also, because He has exposed all errors, and banished 

the shadows of the Old Law, and brought to light the very truth 

itself which was promised by the prophets. " In Him are hid all 

the treasures of wisdom and knowledge" (Col. ii. 5). 

Full of grace : " For we have not seen the glory of power or 

splendour," says S. Bernard, "but the glory of paternal kindness," 

the glory of grace, of which the Apostle saith, " to the praise of the 

glory of His grace" (Eph. i.) Wherefore the Apostle exclaims, 

(1 Tim. hi. 16), "Great is the mystery of piety " (namely, the Word 

made flesh), "which was manifested in the flesh, justified in the 

spirit, appeared unto angels, was preached unto the Gentiles, 

believed on in the world, received up into glory." For how full and 

altogether perfect was the grace of Christ, see the teaching of S. 

Thomas (3 p. q. 7. art. 9 et seq.) 

And truth. A symbol of the union of grace and truth is found in 

the breastplate of the high priest Aaron, which bore the inscription 

of Urim and Thummim, that is, doctrines and truth, or, literally, 

illumination and perfection, that is, truth and grace. These two 

superabounded in Christ, and are especially needful for every priest 

that he may be like Christ. 

Therefore although the Blessed Virgin, S. Stephen, and other 

saints are said to be full ofgrace above other men, yet in respect of 

Christ were they not full. For Christ is, as it were, an ocean flow-

ing out in rivers of grace to all the faithful, to apostles, martyrs, 

confessors, virgins. As the Apostle says (Col. ii. 9), "in Him

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyeEbXFxrwYe_CScP0zU0MLyn3bS_GiuI8wxNEDh-RFG0FVxE4M1orjcCnQ_il40H5sn-nzolECd7Z0VKxYfCnZg1xH9k6bXqXr8V9hFuwoSc4yUAE5idzLTgWsvhvW1sqXNKEBRQ=w615-h900-v0

7e18edf1-8edb-403e-a888-0749cc8e719d

JOHN'S TESTIMONY. 47 

dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." And again, "To 

every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift 

of Christ " (Eph. iv. 7), and " To the Son God hath not given the 

Spirit by measure." 

Ver. i$.—John bears witness, &c. He proves what he had said 

concerning the Word Incarnate, and that He was full of grace and 

truth, by the irrefragable testimony of John the Baptist. For him 

the Jews accounted as a prophet and divine. It is as if he said, 

" Not only have we seen Jesus Christ full of grace and truth, but 

John, who was sent from God, openly and plainly has testified the 

same concerning Him." 

And crieth : the Greek is, ixg&yt, i.e., cried out. For he himself 

was the voice of one crying in the wilderness (Isa. xl. 23). " Whom not I myself alone have heard," says S. Cyril, " but far and wide 

among all hath his cry come. For it was not in secret, nor with 

low and stammering accents, but louder than a trumpet." As 

S. Chrysostom says, " Freely and confidently, casting away fear, he 

preached the advent of God." 

This was He of whom I spake : see verses 27 and 30. It means, 

" Before John had seen and known Christ, he said, that He was 

about to come to save man. And when he had seen Him, he 

repeated and confirmed it." As Theophylact says, " Lest he should 

seem to please merely the person of Jesus, in speaking in too much 

praise of Him, he saith, of whom I spake, that is, even before I had 

seen Him." 

He who cometh, i.e., who is about to preach, says S. Chrysostom, 

after me, was before me. That is, He is preferred in honour before 

me, because He was the destined Redeemer of the world. As 

Bede says, " not in order of time, but of dignity." And S. Augustine, 

" He was not made before I was made " (for John was born six 

months before Christ), but He was placed before me." 

For He was before me .- for since Jesus is true God, He was from 

eternity. So SS. Augustine and Chrysostom. Again, before means, 

greater by nature, more worthy in majesty. S. Chrysostom remarks, 

"John does not say, Christ, by making advance in grace and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzz28FfKVV-VennXGe2Lza44cj9o3sfhykxsUuB_ChqGicLEr82ErvvGpw9kvENlTyzEUcvFeO9o842A99NaBqAzUgfbcRRzjqKzBbiyjJLq-Helj4P50zlSLi2d9B5qFVE9PsQBg=w615-h900-v0

be4f9a89-3820-4a37-830a-11fec2a2ad35

48 S. JOHN, C. I. 

virtue, hath surpassed me ; but He 7vas before me, i.e., ' He was 

always my superior, always more glorious than I,' " as Cyril adds, 

" because He was very God." 

And of His fulness, &c. He follows up and unfolds what he had 

said in the fourteenth verse that the Word Incarnate wasfull ofgrace 

and truth: for of this plenitude of grace and truth have all we, apostles 

and Christians, yea, all the faithful before Christ, received. For 

Enoch, Noah, Moses, and all the rest of the prophets and patriarchs, 

have been sanctified and saved by the aforeseen merits of Christ. 

Origen and Theophylact think that these are a continuation of the 

words of John the Baptist; but S. Chrysostom, Cyril, and others 

better take them as the words of S. John the Evangelist, confirming 

the preceding words of the Baptist. 

Of Hisfulness : i.e., of Him who is most full. For Christ as the 

Head of the Church sheds abroad upon all the faithful, who are 

His members, not the whole fulness of His grace, but a portion 

thereof according to His will. " The saints," says Bede, " receive 

not the fulness of His Spirit, but of His fulness what He giveth." 

" For from the fulness of the Son," says S. Cyril, " as a perpetual 

fountain, the gifts of grace flow out abroad to each soul that is 

worthy of them." This is what the Apostle says, " He hath blessed 

us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places," i.e., by " Christ," 

(Eph. i.) " For He is the fountain and the root of all good," says 

S. Chrysostom ; " He is life, He is light, He is truth, not keeping in 

Himself the riches of His goodness, but diffusing them to all, and 

when He hath diffused them remaining full. Neither is there any 

diminution in Him of that which He supplies to others, but He 

ever bestows His riches yet more abundantly ; and when He has 

imparted to all He still abides in the same perfectness." 

And grace for grace: Greek, ^ag/v dvrl yayros, where avr'i,for, is 

the same as instead of. First some expound thus, gracefor grace, i.e., 

grace upongrace, or, all grace have we received from Christ. As it might 

be said in Hebrew, chen al chen. But this would require Wi instead 

of uvti in the Greek. Johannes Alba, however, defends this interpreta-

tion, Grace for grace, he says, means copious and superabundant

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyaTwCS_elT88MYP_fGIVrQBdRHY-n1dvh56auOylBokcB6eEW_MqCwNaa7ZOygFE4I56Izo-ypxu86gMNKCYMaYUywkletAetPM0weNu0B70_lGK52UG4mvIZHWHEe1LANuCizqw=w615-h900-v0

e96f7ab2-0cff-4d51-8762-b2c18d01667a

grace For grace. 49 

grace. He quotes the Hebrew expressions in the Prophets, stroke 

upon stroke, for a very great stroke, or plague : and Job's skin for 

skin, i.e., skin upon skin, meaning all a man's flocks and herds, skin 

after skin, will he give for his life. Suarez takes the same view : 

Gracefor grace, i.e., second grace instead of first grace. That is to 

say, we all, not men only, but angels, have received increasing grace. 

2. Maldonatus, grace for grace; i.e., one man has received one 

grace or favour; another, instead of it, another grace. But this 

does not suit the meaning of the Greek dvrl, which signifies succes-

sion, not distribution. 

3. S. Austin says, we receive the grace of life eternal, that is, 

beatific glory, here in hope, and after death in reality, instead of the 

grace of this life. For, on the one hand, grace is the seed of glory 

; 

and on the other hand, glory is the consummation of grace. 

4. Others say, we have received from Christ the evangelical 

instead of the ancient Law. For each is grace, because given gratis 

by God. So S. Cyril, Chrysostom, Jansen, &c. 

5. Others expound, In the grace of Christ we have all received 

grace, and by Him have been made pleasing to God. Wherefore 

Paul declares constantly that we are justified and sanctified in Christ. 

This is a useful, but not an exact meaning, for the Greek avri means 

instead of, not in. 

6. And exactly : The Greek avrl has two meanings ; chiefly and 

precisely it denotes vicarious succession, answering to the Hebrew 

tachath, in the place, or room of. " For the grace of Christ we, as 

it were, His sons and successors, have received like grace with 

Him. For as the grace of Christ made Him well-pleasing unto 

God, so likewise does the same grace make us pleasing unto God, 

and sons of God by adoption." So SS. Chrysostom, Cyril, and 

others. Secondly, «»«/' is often used, though improperly, for on 

account of: " on account of or, through the grace of Christ as a 

fountain, we have received grace." It is explanatory of what 

precedes 

 

and of His fulness have all we received—by means of 

what follows, even grace for grace. For grace flows down from 

God through Christ as our Head unto us, who are, as it were, His 

VOL. IV. D

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyY1zIByUwM2SFdB6oMTn1JnBce8YzewblzFUrJuFugDsTxV8NzbGSnmGRMQQwNA_LnF5UhECiCkQ7Ow5raQas8qPxETX1FjOyHRSOSaxbl3djSee2Qz26KzZL_or9BZbfM93fRPA=w615-h900-v0

7e7decf6-5aaa-45b1-afd4-30abd4541af6

50 S. JOHN, c. 1. 

members, as the Apostle teaches (Eph. i.) For God has willed to 

appoint Christ to be, as it were, the universal fountain of grace, 

from whence every grace should flow down to the faithful, that we 

may owe everything to Christ, and render unto Him endless and 

infinite thanks. For the sake of Christ, who is well-pleasing and 

most beloved in His sight, who is also the Mediator, God has 

reconciled us unto Himself, and enriched us with His grace and 

friendship, according to the words in S. Matthew iii. 7, " This is My 

beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased 

; 

" and no man pleases 

Me except through Him. From hence it is plain that we receive 

from Christ the same grace which He has in Himself—the same, I 

say, in kind, not in degree, which would be, ordinarily speaking, un-

becoming and impossible, though some have even maintained this. 

Thirdly, the word "for" (aw/) might denote a certain equality. 

For this is the meaning of the Greek compound dvriiios, that is to 

say, the equal of God, or he who makes himself a god, as Lucifer 

did, and Antichrist will do. So also antitype (aw/VuTos) is that 

which is set over against and corresponds, that which is equal, and 

of the same form. And the antipodes are properly those who walk 

with their feet planted exactly opposite to our own. The meaning 

then would be—Through Christ we have received grace as it were 

equal to the grace of Christ, because by it we have been lifted up, 

and made to belong to the Divine order of things, that is to say, 

sons of God, and " partakers of the Divine nature " (2 Pet. i. 4). 

Thus the Apostles were in some sense the fellows and peers of 

Christ, for He calls them His brethren. Thus the Pope calls the 

cardinals brethren, and so, in some sort, equals them to himself. 

Let a believer then, more especially a priest, or a religious, think 

with himself how he ought to live like Christ, and lead the heavenly 

life which Christ led, that whosoever shall see him, or hear him, 

may say he has seen and heard Christ in his lively image. 

Under the word grace here include truth also. For Christ is 

spoken of as full of grace and truth. And of His fulness of both 

have we all received. For through Christ have we received truth, 

that is, knowledge of God, faith, wisdom, understanding of salvation

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzD1TUmT4fsYGSathBgmFZ3RdoAdGW3nLeUVkYRhDCt4MGD2Ld8OszTdl7HT0GSkqwiT43p3HnKnIM3eSJbSauyMeAAPYL7FdtkdzwMnO3wslhgXXRuk3hf8DPsSzn7aXR2R3WxHQ=w615-h900-v0

fa6bda5f-50f3-4e2d-b410-7966a98b64cf

THE LAW. 51 

and things Divine : also remission of sins, reconciliation with God, 

the adoption of sons, charity, humility, and all other virtues and 

gifts. All are here comprehended under the word grace. 

Ver. 16. 

 

For the law was given by Moses, &c. He gives the 

reason why through Christ we have received grace for grace. It is 

because Moses, who was the Jew's greatest prophet and lawgiver, 

could only give a law which taught and commanded the precepts of 

God, but could not bestow grace to keep those commandments. 

Hence the need of Christ to give grace to fulfil the law. Where-

fore the Arabic translates, grace and truth were needful through 

Jesus Christ. The Evangelist therefore opposes, and prefers Christ 

to Moses, grace to the law. 1. Because Moses in the law only 

taught directly what God willed the Jews to do, namely the pre-

cepts of the Decalogue, under the promise of temporal blessings, such 

as abundance of corn, wine, and oil. But the way of salvation, 

remission of sins, justification, and holiness, by which we arrive at 

life eternal, he did not teach, much less bestow that life. But 

Christ hath both taught it, and hath also bestowed it, through that 

grace and truth which He hath brought from heaven. This is what 

Zacharias sings of in the first chapter of Luke, " To give knowledge 

of salvation unto His people for the remission of their sins." Thus 

too S. Chrysostom, " Grace came by Christ because with authority 

He forgave sins, and bestowed regeneration. Truth came by Him 

because He fulfilled the types and figures." 

2. In the Law was a threefold commandment, the moral law, or 

the Decalogue ; the judicial, and the ceremonial law. To the two 

first the Evangelist opposes grace, without which they could not be 

observed. And the effect of grace is that a believer fulfilling the 

same law from love to God, deserves eternal life. To the ceremonial 

law he opposes truth, because those ceremonies were types and 

shadows of Christ and His sacraments, which shadows Christ ful-

filled, and so brought in truth. Wherefore S. Austin saith, " When 

the Law itself was fulfilled" (through Christ), " grace and truth came 

in. Grace pertains to the fulness of charity, truth to accomplish-

ment of prophecy" (cont. Faust, c. 6).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyLm5g8J3GJ24euL-cVt-fx27CgoPHpGeqbVhtskjqhPxhQtroKd7hxer9XWWLX3q1EEtaZBit7q_ZYNQohrNiE9xwuorvIdmEZzZqiZr2vD-L9Dksy5x3TWUEBCXByKRo9yw9c=w615-h900-v0

a936a346-29a9-49d0-a311-97d8b12e5c50

52 S. JOHN, C. I. 

3. Because Moses gave only an obscure and slight knowledge 

of God and the Holy Trinity, but Christ a knowledge that was 

clear and full. Wherefore Bede thus comprises the whole of what 

we have been saying. " Christ being made man hath declared 

what we ought to think concerning the truth of the Trinity, in what 

manner we ought to hasten to the contemplation of It, by what 

acts we ought to arrive at It." 

Symbolically, S. Austin {lib. de. Trin. 13, cap. 19) by grace 

understands the Word Himself, incarnate in time ; by truth the 

eternal vision of God, to which He leads us. This is what he says : 

" In things that have their origin in time, the highest grace is, that 

man is united to God by unity of person ; but in things eternal the 

highest truth is rightly attributed to the Word of God. Now in 

that He is the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, 

it is brought to pass that He should be the same in the things 

which are done for us in time, for whom we are cleansed by the 

like faith, so that we may steadfastly contemplate Him in the 

things eternal." 

Ver. 18. 

 

No man hath seen God, &c. He gives the reason why 

neither Moses, nor any one else, but Christ alone, hath taught us the 

perfect truth concerning God and Divine things 

 

because He alone 

hath seen God. It is as though he said, those things of which thus far 

I have been speaking, concerning God and the Word, are so sub-

lime, that inasmuch as no mortal man (and therefore not Moses), 

except the Son of God, hath seen God, therefore that Incarnate 

Son alone is able perfectly to declare these things. Thus the 

Fathers passim ; who teach from this passage that Moses saw not the 

essence of God, but only a certain luminous substance assumed by 

an angel, in some manner representing to the eyes of Moses the 

glory of God. Thus S. Gregory says in the Catena: "So long as 

we live here in mortal flesh, God may be seen by certain manifesta-

tions or images of Him, but as He is in His own nature He cannot 

be seen." 

Tropologically, S. Gregory teaches (lib. 18, Mor. cap. ult. et. penult) 

that no one can behold God and Divine things, unless he first die

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy0U561cTC_n4g0yjGyZNchylTC-1KHzyab4xa7CycXDlvIHww0OAcCHkthjGX1gM2xWhQ5tXNUJdz-AlUCnV_iuDMwEjO5fDggk9E8_bTl1plmnF4C0P4DBTIJMPgVD6dlMuDRFA=w615-h900-v0

c5285fe6-3ecd-4b7c-926e-9e66737966e6

THE BOSOM OF THE FATHER. S3 

to this world and its pleasures. For thus he expounds the words 

in the 18th chapter of Job, It is hidfrom the eyes of the living: " Be-

cause whosoever seeth wisdom, which is God Himself, dieth wholly 

to this life, lest he should be holden of its love. For no man seeth 

It who still liveth to the flesh, because no man can at the same 

time embrace God and the world. For he who seeth God dieth 

in this respect, either in will, or in reality, for with his whole soul 

he is separated from the pleasures of this life." 

The Only Begotten who is in the bosom ; Syriac, in the lap : S. 

Cyril, in the womb, for this is one meaning of the Greek xo/wro?. It 

is a figure of speech. For by bosom is signified the highest possible 

union of the Son with the Father. It means that the Son, who is 

most closely united, and consubstantial with the Father, is partaker 

of the wisdom of the Father, and conscious of His most secret 

counsels. And because He knoweth them most perfectly and 

intimately, therefore He alone is able most fully and plainly to 

declare them. And so in fact He has declared them. Thus SS. 

Chrysostom, Cyril, and Augustine. S. Athanasius observes (lib. 3 de 

Unica Trin. substant.) that this expression, the Only Begotten, which 

is in the bosom of the Father, is made use of lest when it is said 

that He was made flesh, it should be supposed He was divided from 

the Father. For in truth He abideth, and is with the Father, even 

as He was in the beginning, and everlastingly. 

Listen to S. Chrysostom, who by this word bosom thinks it is 

signified that the Son not only sees, but comprehends the Father. 

" Many," saith he, " know God, yet none but the Only Begotten 

Son know of what nature His substance is. He has certain know-

ledge, sight, and comprehension, such as it is befitting a son to have 

of his father. For as the Father knoweth Me, He said, so also know 

I the Father (John x. 15). Observe therefore with what fulness of 

language the Evangelist speaks ; for when he says, no man hath seen 

God at any time, he does not go on to say, the Son who hath seen, 

hath declared Him, but He who is in the bosom of the Father hath 

declared Him. For he who only seeth hath not certain knowledge 

of the thing seen : but he who dwelleth in the bosom, to him are all

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxROa7DsBKZ7xrqDjnOsUmutcA2BlxfDFvm2q6ZNQcbIFUk5umoDogAigL_1krV2gPjJjSjkTuxl46ge5Dq2bTGHwg0IXS-BSFiwKECPD0sLgwjju_WdeMPbkhi-89KcfXZ1VtT7g=w615-h900-v0

c912be38-e186-49a7-8873-776dcca83ec1

54 S. JOHN, c. I. 

things plain and certain. Lest therefore when you hear, no man 

knoweth the Father save the Son (Matt. xi. 27), you should say that 

though He hath greater knowledge of the Father than others have, 

and yet knows not what His nature is, therefore the Evangelist says, 

' He is in the bosom of the Father.' 

 

There is an allusion to the words of David concerning Christ 

in the 110th Psalm, "From the womb, before the morning star, 

have I begotten Thee " (Vulg.) That is, "From my fruitful under-

standing I have, as it were, as a Word spoken this, and as a Son 

have I begotten thee." S. Jerome says, "From the womb, i.e., of 

My substance, of My nature, of the very essence of My substance, 

have I begotten Thee." So also Theodoret says, " From the womb," 

that is, " of My substance. For as human beings produce from the 

womb, and that which they bring forth hath the same nature as 

those who bring it forth, so art Thou begotten of Me, and Thou 

showest forth in Thyself the substance of Him who begat." More-

over, Jerome himself translates this verse of the 110th Psalm thus, 

" The dew ofThy youth shall arise to Thee as it were from the womb ; 

 

Aquila, " The dew of Thy childhood arising to Thee early from the 

womb." It means, "Of My Deity have I begotten Thee God:" 

as it is in the Creed, " God of God." So SS. Hilary, Ambrose, 

Augustine, Athanasius, and others against the Arians. For de?v 

means in Hebrew the same as flower in English. " Dew," says R. 

Solomon, " means sweetness, joyfulness, purity of heavenly genera-

tion, as it were dew born of the heavenly dayspring." 

He hath declared: that is, He hath clearly explained and set 

forth to His disciples, and through them to the whole world. The 

Greek is efyyqaaro, which S. Chrysostom says means clearly to 

explaifi secret and hidden things, as Christ has explained to us the 

secrets of the Father concerning the Trinity and the Word, con-

cerning the vocation of man, grace, resurrection, heavenly glory, 

and such like. " This word," says S. Chrysostom, " sets forth 

more express and certain doctrine : wherefore also Christ is called 

the Word, and (the Angel) of great counsel." 

Ver. 19. 

 

And this is the witness of John, &c. John the Baptist

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzeEkJorg7Ln5VVSj0ZuKn9uQtrjRrytxhaFHqGv7Jr27LAMqnSA4idfOgFzjX4n0aQoMvD55bnUZrkYq-qhj0voJZ_KYAWH9Dv9U9zA-sNB8yAps2HsT--8ApvRkNM0j_GjXaX0A=w615-h900-v0

c1b3359f-c183-472b-96b3-749e71109144

S. JOHNS WITNESS. 55 

often bare witness to Jesus, that He was the Messias, or the Christ, 

both before and after His baptism. John the Evangelist therefore, 

omitting in this place the testimony which the Baptist bore to Jesus 

before His baptism, which had been related by the three other 

Evangelists, gives his testimony concerning Him after he had 

baptized Him. For this testimony was public, judicial, and most 

celebrated. It had been judicially demanded by the chief priests 

and magistrates, and had been received by them through the 

ambassadors whom they sent to John. The reason of this embassy 

was because the chief priests saw John leading in the desert an 

angelic life, preaching with great power, baptizing, and moving men 

to repentance, as none of the other prophets had done. The chief 

priests thought therefore that it was their duty to ask him who he 

was, especially because they knew that the sceptre had passed from 

Judah to Herod, and the seventy weeks of Daniel being completed, 

the coming of Messias must be nigh at hand. Wherefore, suspect-

ing that John was the Messias, they ask him, Who art thou ? 

S. Chrysostom gives another reason—that they asked out of envy 

and hatred of Jesus, in order that they might show that Jesus was 

not the Messiah. They would have preferred to bestow the title 

upon John. They disliked John's preferring Jesus to himself, and 

calling Him the Messias or Christ. But although there might be 

some envy mingled with it, the true reason was, as I have said, that 

it was the counsel of God so to exalt John, that the chief priests 

might be driven to ask him whether he were the Christ or not, that 

being asked he might authoritatively answer that which was the 

truth, namely, that not he, but Jesus, was the Messias, and that, 

being convicted by this testimony of John, they might be compelled 

either to receive Jesus as the Messias or to be without excuse. 

Who art thou ? The chief priests appear tacitly at least to have 

inquired of John, whether he were the Christ or not; for John 

replies, / am not the Christ. 

Moreover, they were aware that John was the son of the priest 

Zacharias, and therefore a priest himself. When therefore they say, 

Who art thou ? they ask virtually, What office hast thou received from

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxQKjCKESMud4S1gTgZ9tmDdJJHemddh396JVtGjQqnBL5a4l0NJmWNoopwVOxJPPsQCnUNlKnwcGA3BhjWKB7Fb_YZ1vanj28wUrm8eJUD12UQM8FnF-z3MZwZG5HCd0TwZq1K_A=w615-h900-v0

c114b595-00ab-42ce-b87c-7236a3c0e0de

56 S. JOHN, C I. 

God ? With what object has God sent thee to preach and baptize ? 

For God was wont to commit greater offices to priests. 

Tropologically, let every one often ask himself, Who art thou ? 

Firstly, as regards our substance. Listen to thy conscience making 

answer to thyself—the name of God my Creator is, I Am that I Am 

(Exod. iii.) My name therefore as a creature is " I am that am not," 

because I am nothing of myself, but out of my nothingness have 

been brought forth by God, and made a man. Wherefore my body 

and soul are not my own, but God's, who has given them, or rather 

lent them, to me. As S. Francis was wont to say, " Who art Thou, 

Lord ? Who am I ? Thou art an abyss of wisdom and long-suffer-

ing, and all goodness. I am an abyss of ignorance, weakness, of all 

evil and wretchedness. Thou art an abyss of being, I of nothing-

ness." So when Christ appeared to S. Catherine of Sienna, He 

said, " Blessed art thou if thou knowest who I am, and who thou 

art. I am He who is, thou art she who is not." 

Secondly, as to quality. Who? that is, of what sort art thou? 

Answer, As regards my body, I am weak, miserable, and wretched. 

As to my soul, as regards my reason, I am like unto the angels. 

As regards my sensual appetite, and concupiscence, I am like the 

brutes. Therefore I will follow my reason, and so become assimi-

lated to the angels. 

Thirdly, as regards relation. Who? that is, whose son art thou? 

Reply, I am the son of Adam, the first sinner, and therefore being 

born in sin, I am living in sin, and must die in sin, unless the grace 

of Christ rescue me from my sins, and sanctify and save me. 

Fourthly, as regards employment. Who art thou ? what trade or 

profession art thou ? I am a carpenter, a baker, a governor, a 

shepherd, a lawyer. See then that thou exercise thyself in thy call-

ing, whatsoever it be, as the law of God requires, namely, in such 

wise that thou live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present 

world, looking for the blessed hope, and the coming of the glory of 

the great God, that thou mayest so pass through things temporal, 

that thou lose not, but gain the things eternal. Work, study, live 

for eternity. As S. Bernard was wont often to say to himself,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzdRvtee4Jh7BjHpJZcL-U3H6iEjkKKpNhTBOIpri-lXflxE0An7ytJAo1zx4G_vexO6jY_deaZMout9A4X2Za_yWm6e8cthjZ-53mmNc0ZBN74ufmkH3AQt2IuT4UgcdeaD6BNrw=w615-h900-v0

3d74883b-c434-4bbd-bf65-5e7a5ef89b33

WHO ART THOU ? 57 

" Bernard, tell me, wherefore art thou here ?" And with this goad, 

as it were, he stirred himself up to zeal for all virtues. 

Fifthly, as regards suffering. Who art thou ? that is to say, what 

dost thou suffer ? Reply, In the body I suffer hunger, thirst, disease, 

continual afflictions, so that there is scarcely the smallest space of time 

in which I have not many things to bear. As regards my soul, I have 

far greater and more bitter afflictions, griefs, and anguish, anxieties, 

sorrows, angers, indignation, darkness, fear, &c, so that I seem to 

be, as it were, a mark at which all afflictions hurl their darts, and 

thrust me through with their arrows. Be thou therefore a very ada-

mant of patience, that thou mayest patiently and generously endure 

all things, and win the everlasting crown of patience in heaven. 

Sixthly, as regards place. Who ? that is, where art thou ? Answer, I 

am on earth, placed between heaven and hell, in such wise, that if 

I live holily, I may pass to heaven, if wickedly, to hell. Live there-

fore carefully, warily, and holily, that not hell, but heaven may 

receive thee, when this short mortal life is over. 

Seventhly, as regards time. Who art thou 7 When wast thou born? 

How long hast thou lived ? When shalt thou die ? Answer, Born 

yesterday, to-day I live, to-morrow I die. " For we are of yesterday, 

and know nothing ; all our days upon the earth are but a shadow " 

(Job viii. 9). Therefore despise all things temporal, which fly past 

as a bird doth. Love and covet heavenly things, which endure for 

ever with God and the angels. So shalt thou, being eternal, be 

happy eternally, and abide in everlasting delights. For as S. 

Gregory says, "That we may be eternal, and happy eternally, let 

us imitate eternity. And this is to us a great eternity, even the 

imitation of eternity." 

Lastly, as regards posture and clothing. Who art thou ? that is, 

what posture, or clothing hast thou? Reply, I stand, I sit, I lie. 

I wear the habit of a Christian, a priest, a bishop, a religious. Take 

heed then that thou live conformably to thy habit. For it is not 

the habit which makes the Christian, or the monk, but purity of life, 

humility, charity. 

Ver. 20. 

 

And he confessed, &c. That is, publicly, plainly, and fully

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwp0w66KUT275Y2iPh__EMY0R1nZ_bV2_xR_gMTuEPmb1j3BPPrssFGvyB3JS6LK-IhfA6Lal8TG7ox0IRXOOtPsRixDPYkk_M7NHjTlqQz3mEPEXWAIKSZomcHjIEoZVX9B6kQBw=w615-h900-v0

42f9df93-ed06-4a5c-9fc4-beb7208fa8ea

58 S. JOHN, C. I. 

that he was not the Christ. For when the Hebrews wished very 

strongly to assert anything, they doubled the affirmative, and trebled 

the negative. Observe the great humility of S. John : how firmly he 

refused the name of Christ when it was offered to him. For he 

loved the truth, and Jesus, to whom this name belonged. Men of 

the world love to boast, and say, I am a nobleman, a governor, a 

canon, a bishop. But John teaches us to say, " I am nothing," 

because if I am anything, I have it from God. 

Ver. 21. 

 

And they asked him, &c. When John denied that he was 

the Christ, the messengers asked him if he were Elias. For him God 

took away, that he might be the forerunner of Christ. And of him 

they were then in expectation, according to the words of Malachi 

(iv. 5)," Behold, I send you Elijah the prophet before the great and 

terrible day of the Lord come," meaning the day of judgment, when 

Christ shall return to be the Judge of all. But the Scribes did not 

understand this. They thought that there would be but one advent 

of Christ, and that a glorious one, the precursor of which would 

be Elias. Thus the Jews think even now that Christ has not yet 

come, but is about to come with Elias. And yet they ought to have 

known from the same Malachi (iii. i) that there would be another 

precursor of Christ's first coming in the flesh, even John the Baptist. 

" For I," saith the Lord, " do send My messenger, and he shall 

prepare My way before My face." 

Art thou that prophet ? Greek, 6 w^o^rr);, the prophet par excel-

lence. " Art thou a new and great prophet, such an one as we think 

will come with Messiah, to be His herald ? " So SS. Chrysostom and 

Cyril. But they (the Jews) were in error. For Christ needed not a 

prophet, as Moses, who was not eloquent, needed Aaron. But Christ 

was His own prophet, herald, priest, and lawgiver. Moreover John 

was not a prophet in the sense that he foretold things to come. But 

he pointed out with his finger, as it were, Christ present. Therefore 

was he more than a prophet, as Christ says in the nth of Matthew. 

Ver. 23. lam the Voice, &c. (Isa. xl. 3), where I have expounded 

the meaning. Listen to what the Fathers say about it. "lama servant, and prepare paths, your hearts, for the Lord," says Theo-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw3wHKJvGmqZaNpN_RmJLAwDHN8d1r7P9C38A5yrLa-9y2femsYmMZWI0VOPaTiAUx22EpHNagNbuTU9sz9_RIr9v2a_yLNkQy5JjUms8380Z12mwptxdELiWytFZJwhjuQLGheug=w615-h900-v0

679493fc-8b62-4a99-b830-b7311c2e07fe

CHRIST AT THE DOOR. 59 

phylact. " I come, he says, to say that He is at the doors who is 

expected, that you may be prepared to go whithersoever He may bid 

you," says Cyril. 

Ver. 24. 

 

And they that were sent, &c. John adds this, to suggest 

the occasion why they examined John the Baptist concerning bap-

tism. These messengers who were sent to John were Pharisees, and 

therefore were well versed in the Scriptures. Consequently they 

knew that Messiah would baptize for the remission of sins, because 

Ezekiel (xxxvi. 25) and Zechariah (xiii. 1) had predicted that He 

would do so. But concerning other prophets and saints they had 

not read in Scripture that they would baptize. They ask John there-

fore to tell them by what authority he baptized, especially since he 

not only asserted that he was not Christ, but not even a prophet. 

Ver. 25. And they askedhim, &c. "These Pharisees," says S. Cyril, 

" in their arrogancy insult John, as though they said, Neither Elias, 

nor Eliseus, nor any of the other prophets dared to take upon them-

selves the office of baptizing. With what face then, or boldness, 

dost thou, who art not a prophet, arrogate this office to thyself? " 

Ver. 26.—John answered them, &c. As though he had said, " God hath sent me to baptize with water, that I might stir you up to repent-

ance and tears, so as to fit you for Christ's baptism. For He shall 

baptize you with the Holy Ghost, for the remission of sins," as the 

remaining three Evangelists declare. Therefore John is silent 

about this. 

There standeth one, &c. That is, Christ is living in the midst of you, 

and yet ye know Him not. That is, you do not recognise Him as 

Messiah, but look upon Him as a mere man, as vile and abject. 

Ver. 27.—He it is who, coming after me, &c. After me Christ shall 

come to baptize you, that by His baptism He may perfect mine, 

and may wash and justify them that are penitent. As S. Cyril 

paraphrases, "I in preparation wash with water those who are 

polluted with sins as a beginning of repentance, and by this means 

leading you from what is lower I prepare you for more lofty things. 

For He who is the giver of greater things, and of the highest per-

fection, is about to come after me." Or, as S. Chrysostom says,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzgVzCepc66xr6aq5zJ2J3gVomyCVI6VLX0sBIef_CwQJ_MBB644dRcEJaNa4JNpNaZ70OTKXD4KruiHABmrzdC2FR1ZV8FwamPI0gRjHT6RjFiYNT5yTcMSaasSwefGJPy4b2HHw=w615-h900-v0

d75d3d27-6a26-4f07-a62b-e57d78082776

60 S. JOHN, c. I. 

" My baptism is only a disposition and preparation for the baptism 

of Christ. Mine is of water and corporeal, Christ's is of fire and 

spiritual." 

Whose shoe's latchet, &c. As though he said, " I am not worthy 

to be reckoned amongst the last of the servants of Christ, on 

account of the greatness of the Deity which is in Him." 

Ver. 28.— These things were done in, &c. Bethany is the reading 

of the Latin, Syriac, Arabic versions, of many codices, including the 

Vatican, of Bede, Alcuin, the Gloss, &c. But instead of Bethany, 

Origen, S. Cbrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, S. Epiphanius, and 

S. Jerome (in loc. Heb.) read Bethabara, where Gideon slew the 

Midianites. I observe with Toletus that Bethany and Bethabara 

were one and the same place, or at least that one was nigh the 

other, or on opposite banks of the Jordan. This was the place in 

which the Hebrews, when they came out of Egypt, first crossed the 

Jordan under the leadership of Joshua, to enter the promised land. 

For Bethabara means in Hebrew a house of passage ; Bethany, a 

house of ships. For vessels were waiting here to carry passengers 

over Jordan. This Bethany is derived from Beth, a house, and any, 

spelt with alpha, a ship. The Bethany of Martha and Lazarus was 

a different place, and spelt differently in Hebrew. That Bethany 

means the house of humility, from Beth, a house, and any, spelt with 

ain, humility. 

John, then, chose this place wherein to baptize for several reasons, 

because of the abundance of water, also in memory of the ancient 

passage of the Israelites. S. Jerome says {loc. Hebrceis), " Even at 

this present time many of our brethren who believe, desiring there 

to be born again, are baptized in the life-giving flood." They did 

this in memory of Christ, who was there baptized by John. This 

place is distant about four leagues from the Dead Sea. 

Observe, Christ was baptized on the 6th of January. It was fifty-

five days afterwards that John bore this witness to Christ, or about 

the 1st of March, when Jesus was absent. On the day following 

Jesus presented Himself before John, when John renewed his testi-

mony, saying, Behold the Lamb of God. (See Epiphan. Hares. 51.)

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzxRoE1ClHiRT6N8wzHbP3EmgX1ijYV9Mes-MUvmoCDsy6rI5MsTCyQmu80XLChaDayH-4XgmA_Bz2mMeqSVtvEvU0pNB67sOqU2Hqd11pbDVzkSppkZyLtubEkyqLsifbAqiQIyg=w615-h900-v0

2b5fad5d-3416-4ab0-8959-d0ed36075c64

THE LAMB OF GOD. 6l 

Whence there follows (ver. 29), The next day again John saw, &c. 

Observe that after Jesus was baptized He went into the desert, where 

He fasted for forty days, as is plain from S. Matthew iii. Then 

He came down from the Mount of Temptation, and returned to 

John, to visit and hear him ; but especially that John might in His 

presence confirm the testimony which in His absence he had given 

to the messengers of the Jews ; that he might point Him out with 

his very finger, and leave no place for hesitation to any. 

Behold the Lamb of God. Nonnus paraphrases, " He lifted up 

his finger, and pointed Him out as He drew near to the people who 

beheld Him." " The word Behold," says S. Chrysostom, " is used 

because many were inquiring for Him : therefore he pointed Him out 

being present, saying, "This is He of whom I have been speaking." 

Lamb, Greek, a/tnos, the Lamb divinely prefigured and predicted 

by Moses and Isaiah. " He is led as a lamb to the slaughter," &c. 

(Isa. liii. 7). 

Christ is thus called the Lamb by S. John the Baptist, and by 

His Apostle, S. John the Evangelist, in the Apocalypse. 1. Because 

He was prefigured by the Paschal Lamb, and by the daily morning 

and evening sacrifice of a lamb to God in the Temple, and by the 

other lambs which were offered for sin, according to the Law, and 

yet they could not take away sins. Wherefore they represented 

Christ, who was to take away sin by His Blood. So Origen, &c. 

2. Because Christ was called a Lamb by Isaiah and Jeremiah 

(xi. 19), who was to be offered for the redemption of the world. 

3. He is called a Lamb because of his lamb-like innocence, 

meekness, patience, and obedience, even unto death, which, like 

a lamb, He bore in silence. As S. Peter says, "Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened 

not; but committed Himself to Him that judgeth righteously" 

(1 Pet. ii. 23). 

Christ truly is called the Lamb of God, i.e., the offspring, not of 

sheep, but of God, who by the will of God was offered for man's 

redemption. Thus the sacrifice which Abraham offered is called 

Abraham's sacrifice, as Theophylact says. Or because He was

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy-oh_mDRRH8aaEN8rwQWIESAGe1D302YzslB9Y3DkqyDuRyCH7xG_SG8kmt2EmmiRdPtp9gTm-bG4R86sl-zsD9Tgj6ColwOmadT5_Jb1GP7-fUaXoAd9CfX4d7EOshaZJyJ42=w615-h900-v0

4cf57f77-1ef3-4107-b856-ac007aa30528

62 S. JOHN, C. I. 

offered up to God Himself. Or the Lamb of God is the Divine 

Lamb, because of the Deity which was in Him. Or as Clement of 

Alexandria says, because He was made for us the child and babe 

of the Father. So we call children, lambs. These are the words 

of Clement, " Since the Scripture calls boys and infants lambs, he 

called God who is the Word, who for us was made man, who wished 

in all things to be made like unto us, the Lamb of God, the Son 

of God, the Infant of the Father" (Pazdag. lib. i, c. 5). 

Moreover, Christ for His strength and His victory is called the 

" Lion of the tribe of Judah." He was a Lamb in His Passion, a 

Lion in His Resurrection. 

Who taketh away the sin : taketh away, both as regards the stain 

which sin in act imprints upon the soul, and as regards the guilt of 

sin, which makes the sinner liable to hell. This He takes away by 

making expiation, and bearing the punishment in Himself, thus in 

justice and equity satisfying for sin by His death upon the cross. 

John said this, that no one might think Christ came to his baptism 

to wash away His own sins, as others did ; for He had no sin, but 

was most innocent and most holy. Therefore God made Him the 

victim for the sins of the whole world, that He might sanctify all who 

repent and believe in Him. As S. Augustine says, " He who had 

no participation in our sinfulness is He who takes away our sin." 

Sin : this is the reading of the Greek, Latin, and Syriac. The 

Arabic reads sins ; but the sense is the same. By sin here is to be 

understood the first and universal sin of Adam, that is, original sin, 

which he by generation transmitted to all his posterity, and out of 

which all actual sins, whether venial or mortal, spring. Christ there-

fore, in taking away sin, takes away its source as well as its filth. So 

Bede, S. Thomas, Jansen, &c. As Isaiah saith, " The Lord laid upon 

Him the iniquities of us all." And, " He shall bear their iniquities 

; 

 

and 1 John ii. 2, " And He is the propitiation for our sins : and not 

for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 

As S. Cyril says, " One is slain for all, that the whole human race 

may be won to God the Father." For there is in Christ a perpetual 

power of making expiation for sin in all ages and all nations, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx4iOC61k3l1L0ODQ-3S-6uVeV7P7NI7vvDGpXWU6noNMaJJCHgswDPZk-33TvX9ofMxcHjL5DdBl3bD82Is3b4qQ217gIJnqARaou2ugFTcv_vvWBW0DnzLGDeVCKK69_yS9YK=w615-h900-v0

4420ba74-4519-4a70-a29a-52c5d54f95e9

CHRIST MANIFESTED. 63 

in all men who are willing to receive His faith, His baptism, His 

repentance. 

Ver. 31. 

 

And I knew Him not, &c. As though he said, "Think 

not, ye Jews, that I affirm Jesus to be the Messiah for the sake of 

friendship, or relationship, as though I were His friend and com-

panion ; for I declare unto you that / knew Him not, that I never 

saw Him, or spoke to Him, before His baptism. But as soon as I 

saw Him I recognised Him by the inspiration of God." "What 

wonder," says S. Chrysostom, " that he who from a child dwelt in the 

desert away from his father's house knew not Christ?" 

But that He should be manifested, &c. That is, to the Jews, to 

whom the Messiah was promised, " that they all might be brought 

to believe in Him." Wherefore Nonnus paraphrases, " But that 

He whose face was unknown might be manifested to all the children 

of Israel, who have no ruler, I am come a precursor of the way 

not declared, baptizing an unlearned, ignorant, erring people." 

Ver. 33. And I knew Him not, &c. With water. Nonnus, " in 

the laver without fire and the Holy Ghost." A second time S. John 

declares that he knew not Jesus was the Christ by sight and 

converse, but by revelation from God, that no one might dare to 

dispute his testimony. So S. Cyril. 

Note the expression abiding. From this it is clear that it is 

peculiar to Christ to have all the graces of the Holy Spirit, and 

prophecy, by way of habit ; but that in others only those gifts abide 

which are necessary for holiness of life : according to the words in 

chap, xiv., " He shall abide with you." (See Suarez, Tract, de fide, 

disp. 8, sect. 6, n. 6.) 

Ver. 35. The next day, &c. The Evangelist says that John bare 

witness to Jesus in three consecutive days that He was the Christ. 

He did this to make his witness the more sure and solid. The 

first testimony that he gave was judicial, when he was asked by the 

messengers of the Jews. This was in the first day. The second 

he gave on the day following, which was the 2d of March. The third 

time was here on the 3d of March, before his own disciples, that he 

might cause them to pass from himself to Jesus.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw8PgC9qjI0F-J6096z-sorqWpVFj9ujt2ClDjL8XqaHh2vrrIA9VsuZsWL-oGWYb0A0NKVuqYjJGJ44_ZTdXAWxR-SwidBoE49EX9its_Y_cl1QRQG7Y_1801cDte1qi9A6DhqpA=w615-h900-v0

e65dbf32-1a41-469e-bb3a-5734ee018971

64 S. JOHN, c. I. 

Ver. 36. 

 

And seeingJesus as he walked, &c. As though he said, 

" Behold Christ like a spotless Lamb, destined for a victim, that 

He may be offered to God upon the cross, for the sins of the whole 

world." When John spoke thus it was as though he said to his dis-

ciples, " Why do you follow me ? follow Him who is the Lamb of 

God, the ransom of the world." 

Here observe the prudence and modesty of John. He does not 

compel or urge his disciples to follow Christ, but only points Him 

out to them, that they might the more ardently pursue after so 

great a good when it was discovered by themselves. Like a man 

who, when a jewel is being sold for a small price, points out to 

merchants how great is its worth, and causes them of their own 

accord to long to purchase it. 

Ver. 37. And two ofhis disciples, &c. S. Chrysostom says, " There 

were indeed others of S. John's disciples, but they not only did not 

follow Christ, but were jealous of John's, their master's, honour, and 

preferred him to Christ, as is plain from iii. 26. 

Two : one of those was Andrew, as appears from verse 40 ; who 

the other was is not known. S. Chrysostom asks, " Why is not the 

name of the other given? Either because it was the writer himself, 

S. John the Apostle, or because it was a person of no note." The 

first idea is the more probable. And what favours the conjecture 

is that John and James were companions in fishing with Peter and 

Andrew (Matt, iv.), when, shortly after Andrew and Peter, Christ 

calls John and James. Lastly, the great purity, the virginity, and 

holiness of S. John the Evangelist seem to have been the result of 

the teaching, the purity, and holiness of S. John the Baptist. 

They followedJesus : that they might know Him more fully, says 

Euthymius, and contract a friendship with Him : and if they should 

experience that advantage, they would follow Him wholly, and be 

altogether His disciples. For from what follows it is plain they had 

not given themselves up entirely to Christ, but only desired to make 

trial of Him. 

Ver. 38.—Jesus turning, &c. What seek ye ? It is the voice not 

of one who is ignorant, but of one who invites, and deals gently with

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxHWozmUjKcJSOpGB-fRvQQr2KNjdLgFCofr3TkTO-46OBb6lruBnAE2oKmMTmFc21O2FszJhcN33Y0YwLPlIQcyXKr6h8E15WPxlwXVAvTp_ZMl5cJm_i_hItS3NaYDvjLwM6wJA=w615-h900-v0

12eb6b29-4081-4c77-9d09-3343baf41aa4

CHRIST THE MASTER. 65 

their bashfulness. As S. Cyril says, " He asks what they sought, 

not as ignorant, for He knew all things as God, but that His question 

might afford the beginning of conversation." 

Rabbi : Syriac, Rabboni, i.e., our master ; Arabic, Rabban, ox master. 

By this expression the disciples honoured Christ, and sought His 

favour, and intimated that they wished to become His disciples. 

As Bede saith, " The question itself is an indication of faith : for 

when they say Rabbi, which means master, they follow and call Him 

their Master." And S. Cyril says, " They called Him Master from 

whom they desired to learn." 

Where dwellest thou i Greek, vov f&mis, i.e., Where remainest thou? 

For Christ had but a hospice on earth, and no proper habitation 

or house, according to the words in Matthew : " Foxes have holes, 

and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where 

to lay His head." The disciples ask this question, that they may be 

able to converse privately with Christ in the house, and be instructed 

by Him in Divine things, and those which pertain to the more 

perfect life. They show that they wish to become His friends and 

servants. 

Ver. 39. 

 

He said unto them, Come and see, &c. The tenth hour, i.e., 

four o'clock in the afternoon, or about two hours before sunset. S. 

John adds these words, to show both the zeal of Christ, who though 

night was nigh, would not put them off to the following day, but 

entered immediately upon the things pertaining to salvation ; as also 

to show the ardent devotion of the disciples to Christ, who, careless 

about their night's lodging, had rather spend the night in listening 

to Christ, than at home in their beds. So Euthymius. For they 

remained with Him not merely the two hours which were left of 

daylight, as some suppose, but the whole night. For those two 

hours were not sufficient to speak about their affairs, and to know 

Christ. Neither could they have returned to John before nightfall. 

For, as Cyril says, " It is not fitting that we should speedily be 

satisfied with Divine things, and leave them." 

Moreover, what great things they heard from Christ, what draughts 

of piety they drank, what flames of love they felt kindled by Christ 

VOL. iv, E

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxptTKycerUGBu0C9qlC3W4ugG_gOt7GC282ptkujoxwxgo3glC8qc92vfAe67DcQXk2xnboMzrHkAQGWErRm9gj0MfSXKWX1Wlo74JQra7uU9BlIH_Ud5YZeA2aXRCU3nPN9PAIQ=w615-h900-v0

74c6389a-f194-4515-be26-d4b3a6fda52f

66 S. JOHN, C. I. 

those only know who have had experience of them. Wherefore 

S. Austin exclaims, " How blessed they accounted the day ! how-

blessed the night ! Who can tell us the things which they heard 

from the Lord ? " Certainly we may gather what was said from the 

effect produced : for Andrew was so inflamed with love for Christ 

that he forthwith strove to gain his brother Peter to Christ, and 

inflame him with love for Him, 

Ver. 40. 

 

Now one ofthe two, &c. John inserts this to show in what 

way Peter, who was to be the prince of the Apostles, and the head 

of the whole Church, was led to Christ. It was because Andrew, 

being glad at finding and hearing Christ, brought his own brother 

Peter, for whom he had a singular love, to Him, that he might make 

him partaker in so great a good. For this zeal, which burns to make 

others, especially those nearest to us, partakers with us, and to draw 

them to God, is a mark and an effect of the Divine Vocation. For 

as fire kindles fire, so does zeal kindle zeal. Moreover, Peter, as 

well as Andrew, seems to have been a disciple, or at least a diligent 

hearer of John the Baptist. Which of the two was the elder is not 

known. The conversion of Peter is the glory and praise of Andrew. 

Ver. 41. He firstfindeth, &c. the Christ, that is, the Anointed, 

not indued with corporeal anointing, but with spiritual grace, both 

that of the Hypostatic Union, as well as that grace which was 

habitual and specially excellent. This last was the grace by which 

as man He was created by God, and, as it were, consecrated, first a 

priest, secondly, a teacher, thirdly, a prophet, fourthly, a king, fifthly, 

a lawgiver, sixthly, the Redeemer of the world. The Greek is rh 

Meeaiav, i.e., that Christ, that Anointed One: the one, only, special 

Prophet, predicted by the rest, whom all were eagerly expecting as 

the Restorer of Israel. So Euthymius. 

We have found the Messiah, whom I and thou are most eagerly 

expecting. It would seem that both Andrew and Peter, partly from 

the prophetic oracles, and partly from the testimony of John, were 

inflamed with the desire of seeing Christ. For, as Bede says, " No one finds but he who seeks : he who saith that he hath found shows 

that he had been a long while seeking." Euthymius, following S.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxRxlvzB8fm-RtPKsNNO52hbEnFZZ9HTTfBv2pK5idPT42KQl4zX0evwZdUH9Eb_clKHL9TGm0zXzR4C8JVTaW5K7I0P3TBrwBJTzuVmECNxoPhX_KF1uxZL-Yf_e6mQx75qdGDlQ=w615-h900-v0

65399ddf-2ed1-4492-984e-fd61a1a5e4bf

PETER CHRIST'S VICAR. 67 

Chrysostom, as he is wont, saith, " This is the speech of one who 

is very glad ; We have found Him whom we sought, whom we 

hoped should come, whom the Scriptures announced." Andrew, 

therefore, that he might communicate his great joy at finding Christ, 

to his brother Peter exclaims, " We havefound the Messiah." Where-

fore " they no more returned to S. John," as S. Chrysostom says, 

"but were so closely united to Christ, that they undertook John's 

office, and themselves preached Christ." 

Hence we learn, morally, that God by His grace meets the long-

ing soul, and so fills it that it may the more desire and thirst for 

Him. Yea, God is wont first to put this desire of Himself into the 

soul, that He may thereby prepare the soul for Himself and His gifts, 

and make it capable of receiving them. 

Ver. 42. 

 

And he brought him to Jesus. " It is probable," says S. 

Chrysostom, "that Andrew related many other things calculated to 

persuade. The other disciple was also present to confirm what he 

said. But Andrew, since it was not his office, and because he was 

not sufficient to tell of so great a light, brings him to that very 

fountain which he had discovered." Moreover, the mind of Peter, 

like a straw in presence of the fire, was inflamed with the desire of 

seeing and hearing Christ. Wherefore S. Chrysostom proceeds, 

" Consider the obedient mind of Peter from the beginning, and how 

full of good will. He brought him to Jesus; but let no one find 

fault with his too great readiness in believing. For it is not said 

that he immediately persuaded him, but only that he brought him 

to Jesus, there to learn all." 

Jesus beholding him (as it were a fitting subject to preach and 

make known His glory, and therefore designing him to be His suc-

cessor and vicar, that is, the Pontiff of the Church) said, &c. Simon 

Peter's father was called Johanan or John, by contraction Jona, as 

Jehoshua is contracted into Joshua and Jesus. Christ says this 

that He may reveal secrets, and show him that He is the Searcher of 

hearts and his God. 

Thou shalt be called Cephas. Christ promises to Simon the name 

of Cephas, or Peter, as much as to say, I will give thee, Simon,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyblGcVuwq-ILT6Ot5BUPHg5UDXVZFqx1wp3LX1FqGqp6Zenzz68QYo-B6CaetyPrK03lZ1agA68EY2XLadpC7ArHBfCTba-AKL0Hilpncxetsym-ilxybjGxVmwVGtfPct5_PAGg=w615-h900-v0

dd954d65-1d01-471e-92bf-ecfca2055614

68 S. JOHN, C. I. 

another name. I will call thee Cephas, i.e., a rock or Peter, for 

I will make thee the rock of the Church, so that on thee and 

thy faith, and thy government, the fabric of My Church may rest 

securely as upon a most solid foundation of rock. (See what is said 

on S. Matt. xvi. 18.) 

Ver. 43. 

 

On the morrow, &c. That out of Galilee He might call 

untutored fishermen, to create them His Apostles, and the preachers 

of His Gospel, lest the Christian faith should be supposed to be the 

work of man, not of God. For the Apostles were Galileans. For 

the Galileans were poor and ignoble in comparison with the Jews 

who were sprung from Judah, which was the royal tribe. 

Hefindeth Philip, not by chance, but going of set purpose to the 

place where He knew Philip was. There He found him whom He 

carefully sought, and whom He destined to be an Apostle. 

And Jesus saith unto him. This is the first exterior calling by 

Christ. For Peter and Andrew were first called by an inward inspi-

ration, not outwardly by Christ's external voice, but by hearing the 

voice of John the Baptist their master saying of Christ, Behold the 

Lamb of God ! They were not called by Him, but of their own 

accord they came to Jesus, in order to find out His doctrine and life, 

but not, as it were, about to become His sure and firm disciples. 

Thus Toletus. To Philip therefore this praise and glory is due 

that he was the first of all to hear Christ say, Follow Me, and to 

experience an outward call at the same time that the Holy Ghost 

influenced his mind inwardly ; and obedient to this vocation he 

straightway followed Christ, for he was himself a student of the 

Mosaic law, and anxious about the coming of Christ, as Theophy-

lact says. Theophylact gives as the cause of his following the 

attractive voice of Christ, " The voice of the Lord seems to have 

touched his mind as it were with a goad of love." For it was not 

merely the Saviour's voice which spoke, but He forthwith made 

those to whom He spoke worthy to be inflamed with His love, even 

as Cleophas said, " Did not our heart burn within us, whilst He 

talked with us by the way ? 

" 

Ver. 44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, &c. John adds this, says

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzLBXI7ow2nnmZa0s066ryKH65XkkE4huAdGIpZ9RsGd3NYav0Ed1K-kcSbziETzbcrJSROEG08adh7t3QUqtqb_-8E_t8O4EzqJcOcC8WvrgrJSEODwaElleXgYan05Wo3YKcGWw=w615-h900-v0

06e03e78-9bd4-48ce-8842-c6ab8965a035

PHILIP AND NATHANAEL. 69 

Theophylact, to intimate that Andrew and Peter had previously 

informed Philip, who was their townsman, that they had found the 

Messiah, and that He was Jesus of Nazareth. Wherefore Philip, as 

soon as he heard Christ call, Follow Me, immediately followed Him, 

because his mind was already prepared, and eager for Christ. 

Moreover, Bethsaida was contiguous to the Sea of Galilee, and 

near Capharnaum, where Peter and Andrew had a house, as we 

learn from the 8th of S. Matthew. This, then, was the country of 

three of the Apostles, namely, Peter, Andrew, and Philip. Bethsaida 

means in Hebrew the house of hunting, or fishing, because fisher-

men, such as Peter and Andrew, dwelt there, and caught fish in the 

neighbouring sea. 

Ver. 45. 

 

Philipfindeth Nathanael, &c. "Not by chance," as Cyril 

saith ; " but he sought him with great diligence, for he knew that 

he was a very diligent searcher of the Scriptures." It would appear 

that he found him at Cana of Galilee, which was the native place 

of Nathanael, as is plain from chap. xxi. 2. 

Nathanael, his friend and comrade. You will inquire who was 

this Nathanael ? 

1. Claudius Espenseus, commenting on 2 Tim. iv., says that 

Nathanael was the same as Ursicinus, the first Bishop of Bourges. 

2. The Greek Mensea says that Nathanael is the same as the 

Apostle Simon the Cananite. He is there commemorated on the 

2 2d of April as follows : "The Holy Apostle Nathanael, which was 

Simon Zelotes, of Cana in Galilee, where Christ at the marriage feast 

turned the water into wine." He is also commemorated in the 

Mensea on the 10th of May. 

3. and more probably, Rupertus and Jansen in this passage 

think Nathanael is the Apostle Bartholomew. They show this, 

firstly, because the other Evangelists always join together Philip and 

Bartholomew, as John here joins Philip and Nathanael. Secondly, 

because we nowhere read of Christ's calling Bartholomew, unless 

it were this call of Nathanael. Thirdly, because the other three 

Evangelists who make mention of Bartholomew make no mention of 

Nathanael, and vice versa with S. John. Fourthly, because S. John

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAynUEMwkQ6BpPLDQIMW-Jrf9nJA_227ULVuxvw_Dwki3yUbwdGUFsrIi9zDJaEZRAXrq5Fat8kINdmZ3dXsqrQPVmmWiiseZy81Y2mAe7FrmWhQQwK5lO0YUNlZ8yXAgye5VyVi=w615-h900-v0

9f1fce3e-182e-4dad-a579-6793e1780664

76 s. John, c. t. 

(xxi. 2) associates Nathanael with the Apostles Peter, Thomas, 

James, and John in fishing, and the vision of Jesus. It would seem 

therefore that he was an Apostle, and yet it is not apparent who else 

he could be if he were not Bartholomew. Fifthly, because Bartho-

lomew does not seem to be a proper name, but only to signify that 

he was the son of Tolmai ; and his proper name seems to have 

been Nathanael. Sixthly, because Christ said of Nathanael, Behold 

an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. And then Christ promises 

him a vision of angels ascending and descending upon Himself. 

Christ therefore seems to have specially loved him, and to have 

chosen him for a friend and Apostle. 

S. Augustine, however, dissents from this view, because he thinks 

Nathanael was a doctor of the Law. He discoursed with S. Philip 

out of the law. But Christ did not choose for His Apostles men 

learned in the Law, but rude and ignorant fishermen. To this it 

may be replied that Nathanael was a student, but not a doctor of 

the Law. Just as Philip, Andrew, and Peter all discoursed out of 

the Law concerning the coming of Messiah. If, however, Nathanael 

was not an Apostle, he was certainly a disciple, wherefore L. Dexter 

(Chron. ad A.D. 101) says, " Nathanael, one of the seventy disciples 

of the Lord, sleeps in Treuga, a city of Spain," now called Leon. 

Another writer adds that he slept in the Lord on the 30th of 

November. 

Nathanael means in Hebrew the gift of God, or God gave, or 

given by God ; in Latin, Adeo-datus. The prince of the tribe of 

Issachar in the time of Moses was called Nathanael (Num. i. 8). 

It may be that our Apostle was descended from him, and took 

his name. 

Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. For Nazareth is only three 

hours distant from Cana, so that Nathanael of Cana might easily 

know of Jesus of Nazareth, Joseph's son, as he was commonly 

reputed to be. 

Ver. 46. 

 

Nathanaelsaid unto him, &c. For Nazareth of Galilee was 

a place ignoble and obscure, and despised by the Jews. Wherefore 

the Pharisees say (vii. 57), Out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. " How

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxvOzsGqJg67X7i1m3RNQvv55j_jLGX4xSymiUvXj6nGO5zYAvyCEOp1RQZFlUsufzlkkJiEhq3RyRtmqCVezmXFlwn3jYi3pFrcZPjovUM4vJwMZoEBr-TGE_djcwuVFUrruQ6=w615-h900-v0

d1f63638-b81d-413d-ad3c-81533b77219d

ATTRACTIVENESS OF CHRIST. ft 

then, O Philip, canst thou think that Christ is sprung from Nazareth, 

especially when Micah foretold that Christ was to spring from Juda 

and David, and to be born at Bethlehem ? " So S. Chrysostom, who 

adds, " He shows therefore both knowledge of the Scripture, and 

simplicity of disposition, as well as a vehement desire for the 

coming of Christ in that he did not despise Philip's words. For 

he knew that Philip might be deceived with regard to things to 

be commemorated in his country." And Philip was partly wrong; 

for though Christ was conceived at Nazareth, He was born at 

Bethlehem, of which Philip was at this time ignorant. 

Come and see. Syriac, Come and thou shalt see. " I will not dis-

pute with thee about Nazareth, but come, see and hear Jesus : and 

you shall experience what I have experienced, that you may be 

ravished with His love, and believe that He is the very Christ." 

Listen to S. Chrysostom. " Philip does not tell him how He is 

the Christ, and how the prophets have foretold, but he leads him 

to Jesus, knowing that he will not go away from Him if he tastes 

His words and His doctrine. If you only see Him, he says, if you 

only speak with Him, you will at once agree with me." "We ought 

to believe," says Cyril, " that there was a certain unspeakable loveli-

ness in the words of Christ which attracted the minds of the hearers 

by its great sweetness." 

Ver. 47. 

 

-Jesus saw Nathanael, &c. He is a follower of the can-

dour, simplicity, and sanctity of Israel, that is, of the patriarch Jacob, 

from whom he was descended. Wherefore the Syriac translates, 

Behold a son of Israel indeed. Jesus shows that He knew the pure 

state of Nathanael's mind, that thereby Nathanael might know that 

Jesus was not a mere man; but that He was also God, and the 

Searcher of hearts. S. Chrysostom thinks that Christ alludes to 

what Nathanael had said to Philip, Can any good thing come out of 

Nazareth 1 As if Jesus had said, " I am not displeased with what 

thou hast said about Me, because I know thou hast a candid mind, 

and art anxious to know the truth." 

Ver. 48. Nathanael sailh, &c. " Observe," says S. Chrysostom, 

" the consistency of the man. He is not puffed up by praise, but

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwAxW0KqSImuBBn8JwmpXOpe5P3NMnYTxUb4i0kSuuT5s_ABbrImzRW0I2Gnw87PYK5rMMlA6AK_KroaRDHrH4KaReMWwm_Lk4ZD-NjNOt5y7xN-qNJ4C0NhVr-Cj1nz4EwrfCaaQ=w615-h900-v0

91546b97-e4db-44cb-9918-76439619d9fd

?2 S. JOHN, c. I. 

he proceeds to inquire accurately, that he may learn something 

certain about Christ." 

Jesus answered, &c. " When thou wast alone under the fig tree, 

and thoughtest that no one saw thee, I saw thee, and know what 

thou wast doing in secret there. Hence thou mayest gather that I 

am greater than man, even Messiah, the Son of God." So S. Cyril, 

S. Augustine, and others. 

Mystically, S. Gregory {Moral. I. 18, c. 20), Under the fig tree, 

i.e., beneath the shadow of the Law, / saw thee, that I might 

transfer thee to the vine of My Gospel. 

Tropologically, learn from hence that God and Christ are every-

where present, and are to be feared, when thou art alone in thy 

chamber; yea, when thou secretly thinkest and desirest anything 

in thy heart, Christ is looking at thee, and beholding thy thoughts 

and desires. Take heed therefore lest thou do anything, or desire, 

or think anything, which will offend the eyes of His majesty. For 

so He beheld Nathanael, and what he was doing under the fig 

tree. So also God saw Adam under a fig tree eating its forbidden 

fruit. 

Ver. 49. 

 

Nathanael answered, &c. Son of God. that is, His natural 

and consubstantial Son, for this is the plain meaning of the words. 

So SS. Cyril, Augustine, Maldonatus, &c. But S. Chrysostom, 

Euthymius, Lyra, &c, think Nathanael was ignorant that Christ was 

God, and only believed that He was the adopted Son of God, by 

a peculiar grace by which he saw that He was superior to all other 

prophets and saints. 

I am disposed to think that Philip, from the testimony of John 

the Baptist concerning Jesus (ver. 34), believed Him to be the Son 

of God, but in a confused sort of way, without clearly discerning 

between natural and adoptive sonship, and that he persuaded 

Nathanael to think as he did himself. For although John the 

Baptist in saying that Christ was the Son of God meant His natural 

Son, by the Hypostatic Union of the Humanity with the Word, 

Philip and Nathanael did not as yet understand this until they had 

been more fully taught.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzPgUvrDL1FeP0UIcbcy9TBDIZid73QevUD50Ikxf0Pcbiw5jjiaX5CICtN8uEyjPxkUP4_hr_qQBZeeajWaFyMhuQnRn82ts90H77gZkH42gbpdVs3mJPF3q2iXn8ef91FW8LV8w=w615-h900-v0

9047966d-ed01-488d-91c7-da530143c126

HEAVEN OPENED. 73 

King of Israel, i.e., Messiah, son of David and Solomon, and 

therefore heir of the kingdom of the twelve tribes of Israel. This 

is what David foretold in the 2d Psalm, speaking in the person of 

Christ: "Yet have I set My King upon My holy hill of Zion. I 

will declare His precept : the Lord said unto Me, Thou art My Son, 

to-day have I begotten Thee." From hence it is clear that David 

foretold that Messiah would be the Son of God by nature. But 

few before John the Baptist and Christ Himself clearly and fully 

understood this. The CEcumenical Council of Constantinople, by 

a constitution of Pope Vigilius, pronounces an anathema against 

those who would explain the words of Nathanael, Thou art the Son 

of God, to be so applied to Christ as though He were not very God, 

but as it were of the household of God, and were named God on 

account of the friendship which he had with God. 

Ver. 50. 

 

-Jesus answered—greater things—the greater mysteries of 

My doctrine, life, passion, resurrection, by which thou shalt know 

not only that I am the King and Lord of Israel, but of the whole 

universe of heaven, and of the angels. 

Ver. 51.— Ye shall see heaven opened: not that the heaven was to be 

in reality cleft, but because it was to afford a passage to the angels 

going in and out, like as it were a door that is opened. Thus 

heaven shall appear to be opened. This is the figure of speech 

called catachresis. In like manner, the heaven seemed to be opened 

at Christ's baptism. So too S. Stephen, when he was stoned, saw 

Jesus standing at the right hand of God. By this vision it is signi-

fied that heaven, which had been shut for four thousand years because 

of the sins of men, was now to be opened by Christ. 

The angels of God, &c, to obey Him as their King. This is the 

force of the Greek iitl, which answers to the Hebrew al. Wherefore 

Vatablus translates under the Son of Man, as though Christ said, 

"under My power and sway, as I will and command." So Frank Lucas. 

Observe (1.) that Christ, in calling Nathanael an Israelite in whom 

was no guile, evidently alludes to the vision of angels ascending and 

descending in the ladder from earth to heaven, which the Patriarch 

Jacob saw at Bethel (Gen. xxviii. 12). So S. Augustine. For Israel,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxwDayvq_-F63o0amr97RpFC7CwNSJ9w6av2Ce0kg5RJp6M_hYuLvIxeKWPDwIcFP4nPVPfzwhkNsKy9bP5sy9q2PxuWsAnMkCx7__gKUgM9ZtxvQivUwauYGtl2GmIdpapL05CbA=w615-h900-v0

28849cc4-7f31-4090-8965-347a0465f1ea

74 S. JOHN, c. I. 

or Jacob, was a type of Christ. For Christ is the true Israel, i.e., 

having power with God. Christ is the Patriarch of Christians, the 

founder of Bethel, the House of God, i.e., the Church both militant 

and triumphant. 

2. Christ, by what He says about this vision of the angels ascend-

ing to Himself, signifies that He is the Prince not only of men, but 

of angels, and therefore true God, the Son of God. For the angels 

ascend and descend to Him as His ministers, that they may obey 

and fulfil all His commands both in heaven and earth. So S. Cyril 

and Chrysostom. 

You will ask, When did this descent and ascent of the angels to 

Christ take place? i. S. Chrysostom thinks it took place when 

Christ suffered His agony and bloody sweat in the garden, when an 

angel appeared, strengthening Him (S. Luke, xxii. 44). Also when 

the angels appeared to the woman to announce His resurrection 

(S. Matt, xxviii.) 

2. S. Cyril thinks it took place at His baptism ; for then it was 

that by the ministry of angels a dove was formed, and flew down 

upon Christ, which was the sign of the Holy Ghost. But this had 

already taken place when Christ spoke to Nathanael. 

3. Euthymius thinks it took place at the ascension ; for then 

all the angels accompanied Him as He went up, like servants their 

prince, and soldiers their king. 

4. Toletus thinks that it is continually taking place in the Church, 

which Christ rules by means of the angels. 

5. Maldonatus thinks it will take place in the Day of Judgment 

 

for then all the angels, both good and bad, will stand in His 

presence—the good, that they may after the Judgment lead the 

righteous to heaven ; the bad, that they may carry the wicked to hell. 

6. Frank Lucas understands the words to refer to the miracles of 

Christ, and the heavenly gifts, in which the angels were employed by 

Christ in this life, and afterwards. Jesus means, he says, that at 

the bidding of the Son of Man from henceforth heaven should seem 

to be open, with the angels going and coming, because in a short 

time the angels, being commanded by the Son of Man, would bring

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwGT4gx04CjQvt3MkJdPmBPWUlb3KK0wOLy8R5FhSyS0KDZGRfBCAUSefz5756SWYL_oDVIFEQW9HvQwL28SlUgYzzotAjoxIhe0wNgDbjcrTrupG5Dz2D5JNhNfbVlEBw4dvmq9g=w615-h900-v0

c28b03c0-48cb-40e0-8af5-82b77d9dd2ff

VISION OF ANGELS. 75 

great abundance of God's great gifts to the earth, which all would 

behold,—even the healing of the sick, the cleansing of the lepers, 

giving sight to the blind, the justification of the wicked, the effusion 

of the Holy Ghost. And since all of these are manifest gifts of 

God, heaven could not seem other than to be opened, and the holy 

angels, by whom heavenly things are ministered, to serve, at the 

bidding of the Son of Man, by those who beheld Him bestowing 

them upon many. Christ therefore is here speaking of all kinds of 

miracles and heavenly gifts, which, immediately after the calling of 

Nathanael, He was about to manifest in the whole period of His 

mortal life, and after His ascension, in the government of the 

Church until the end of the world. All these meanings are true 

and apposite. 

But because Christ specially promises this vision of angels to 

Philip and Nathanael to strengthen and augment their faith in Him, 

this ascent and descent of the angels upon Him was not fulfilled 

either at His baptism, passion, resurrection, or ascension. There-

fore we say that the words more plainly, simply, and expressly imply 

that this was an open, or manifest, and peculiar vision of angels 

coming to the living Christ, such as was given to Jacob, who was 

a type of Christ. Wherefore that vision of Jacob presignified a 

similar vision of angels to Christ, a vision like that which took 

place at His birth, when the angels who descended to Him sang, 

Glory to God in the highest. But where and when this angelic vision 

took place the Evangelists do not tell us, just as they omit many 

other acts in the life of Christ. So Jansen. 

This vision took place (i.) to show that Christ had reconciled 

men and angels, earth and heaven, and had restored the mutual 

communion and friendship which existed in Paradise. 

2. To show that Christians are strangers and foreigners on earth, 

and ought to converse with angels, and imitate the angelic life, as 

" fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God." 

3. To assign angels to us as our guardians, to defend us against 

all the attacks of men and evil spirits, to urge us to the practice of 

heroic virtues, and when we die to carry us to heaven. For the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw_87cnnHRFJnVs9mNVo0nQvgwGoSy_k7XivkaZZSJ9mImNqsLf4n7lyaCvu6l3dCHKcHza_f_ug5rt6jNBERCMAZz8aRanvi3MoGSxZDEisP2weJec1CMAfDhqGZYzyGatMXrTOw=w615-h900-v0

15df45b9-3e0d-48e6-a4ef-112b3913ef3c

?6 S. JOHN, c. I. 

angels ascend to bear our sighs and prayers to Goa : they descend 

to bring God's gracious gifts to us. 

4. To declare the majesty of Christ and the obedience and 

reverence of the angels to Him. For He, as S. Chrysostom says, 

has been set " far above all principality, and power, and might, and 

dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, 

but also in that which is to come " (Eph. i. 21).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw-JL1e_ief2Nt2VYtyceovW_XNto2FmYZwiO8qVqcaZFQIhS2M1rcOxr87IayZ_FFjQ0FLs2y3Gf7cSzdPUfjjEvp75Ps2DL8N95xun-am4PaYyLx3vK-CYYDJJYv5N1vsAZZKZQ=w615-h900-v0

a7dfd388-304c-4532-8276-d2d2dc0a982d

( 77 ) 

CHAPTER II. 

I Christ turneth water into wine: 12 departeth into Capernaum, and to Jeru-

salem, 14 where He pitrgeth the Temple of buyers and sellers. 19 He fore-

telleth His death and resurrection. 23 Many believed because of His miracles, 

but He would not trust Himselfwith them. 

AND the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee ; and the mother 

of Jesus was there : 

2 And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage. 

3 And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have 

no wine. 

4 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee ? mine hour is not 

yet come. 

5 His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it. 

6 And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the 

purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. 

7 Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled them 

up to the brim. 

8 And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the 

feast. And they bare it. 

9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and 

knew not whence it was : (but the servants which drew the water knew ;) the 

governor of the feast called the bridegroom, 

10 And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; 

and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse : but thou hast kept the 

good wine until now. 

11 This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested 

forth his glory ; and his disciples believed on him. 

12 IT After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his 

brethren, and his disciples : and they continued there not many days. 

13 IT And the Jews 

1 passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, 

14 And found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and 

the changers of money sitting : 

15 And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of 

the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen ; and poured out the changers' money, 

and overthrew the tables ; 

16 And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence ; make not 

my Father's house an house of merchandise.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxJZ66Wf6s5ZSQGk_y8JnDmxhTLlxTymmAl-drLgMi8zpCcWwpRZXc4cpEwxW5gxREotAvjJOvOBZLCn69BXKEDkG-Z67L4AFlvl6P1Vvoy9eJHODxJe0SU0Z9byZ6Ogo726jNlPQ=w615-h900-v0

2d8fc2fb-f2f2-410c-a916-15f527f2ecc4

78 S. JOHN, C II. 

17 And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house 

hath eaten me up. 

18 IT Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto 

us, seeing that thou doest these things ? 

1 

 

Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days 

I will raise it up. 

20 Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and 

wilt thou rear it up in three days ? 

21 But he spake of the temple of his body. 

22 When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that 

he had said this unto them ; and they believed the scripture, and the word which 

Jesus had said. 

21 Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast-day, many 

believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did. 

24 But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men ; 

25 And needed not that any should testify of man : for he knew what was in 

man. 

On the third day, &c. The third day, that is, from Christ's 

departure for Galilee, and the calling of Philip. For this was the 

last date mentioned by S. John. 

The following is the sequence of these days in the life of Christ. 

He was baptized by John in the thirty-first year of his age, on the 

6th of January, as the tradition of the Church declares. On the 

same day, after dinner, He retired into the desert, where He fasted 

forty days. This fast thus began on the 7th of January, and ended 

on the 15th of February. Then he returned to Nazareth, where He 

abode fifteen days. Directly afterwards, that is to say, on the fifty-

sixth day after His baptism, as S. Epiphanius says (Hceres. 51), or 

the 1st of March, the Jews sent messengers to John the Baptist, to 

ask him whether he were the Christ or not? The day following, on 

March 1, Jesus came to John, when he pointed Him out with his 

finger, saying, Behold the Lamb. On the 3d of March, John repeated 

this testimony before two of his disciples, of whom Andrew was 

one. On the morrow, or March 4, Jesus went into Galilee, where He 

called Philip. Since this was the second day from the coming of 

Andrew with his brother Peter to Christ, it must have been on the third 

day, or March 5, when the wedding-feast took place. Wherefore S. 

Epiphanius, in the place already cited, says that it took place on the 

sixtieth day from Christ's baptism. However, the same Epiphanius,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx2Srz0TUkjTRaI3inc3C_ZCxZINIDu7_Hq1fV_fHmKfQzrell1aI6ElmELD10OgUGN6t0AsEK5GfxX4B-p_ZGsv4oZEkTldk1-qcCMponViD-muYIwAo_XMkKqwGCRkTcyNLbZrA=w615-h900-v0

f559159b-14d0-4af8-8dd0-22635e30d80f

THE FOUNT OF GERASA. 79 

contrary to the rest of the Fathers, and the general consent of the 

Church, says that Christ was baptized on the 8th of November. 

This would bring the marriage at Cana to the 6th of January, or 

the same festival of the Epiphany, on which thirty years previously 

the Magi had been led by a star to worship Christ at Bethlehem. 

He adds that in memory of so great a miracle as this conversion of 

water into wine, even in his own time, on the nth of the month 

Tybus, which answers to our 6th of January, certain fountains ran 

with wine. He testifies this of the fountain of Gerasa in Arabia. 

He says that he himself had drank of the fountain of Cibyris in 

Caria thus turned into wine on the day and hour when the miracle 

was wrought. He says that many in Egypt bear the same testimony 

with regard to the Nile. What Epiphanius says has led some to 

think that it was in the thirty-second or following year of Christ's 

ministry, and on the 6th of January, that the marriage-feast and the 

miracle took place. But the chronological table given above shows 

this to be a mistake. 

You will say then, Why did God renew the miracle of the conver-

sion of water into wine yearly on the 6th of January? I reply, 

because the Church commemorates the miracle on that day, though 

it did not actually take place upon it. For the Church wished to 

celebrate on the same feast of the Epiphany, or manifestation of 

Christ, the three miracles by which Christ first made Himself mani-

fest to the world : the first, the leading of the Magi by a star ; the 

second, His baptism, when the Father's voice was heard like thunder, 

This is My Beloved Son; the third, the turning water into wine. 

Two of these miracles happened on the same day of the month, or 

the 6th of January ; the third, two months afterwards, or the 6th of 

March. When therefore the Church sings, on the Feast of the 

Epiphany, " To-day water was made wine," it is as though she said, 

" To-day is this event recalled to the memory of the faithful." So 

S. Austin and Baronius. 

As a parallel to this miracle, in many places of the West at the 

season of the Passover, when solemn baptism was wont to be con-

ferred in the Church, copious streams of water have been known to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy2tJDto91MSvKiGfCGRVzLlAKjGfPd3Bk-mRdYemZB9bz1st-T4i0UvhRZwbuG8dAvOw6lAwCH4Aj7PpZV1PuxUD91NA0Y9dR6dRmck3YA2BGTzu46v-BOZzE-S-e8nWPGYOideA=w615-h900-v0

da9d3a4b-4955-4247-9499-728e918ea9f5

80 S. JOHN, C II. 

flow out of a dry and arid font or fountain (fonte) to be used at the 

baptism. This was done, not because it was the day when Christ 

was baptized, but because of the solemn baptism then conferred by 

the Church. 

Marriage, Syriac, Feast, sc. of a marriage. You will ask, Whose 

marriage was this ; and who was the bridegroom ? Bede, Ruperti, 

Lyra, S. Thomas, and others, think that the bridegroom was S. 

John the Evangelist. They are influenced by the authority of S. 

Augustine, who says on this passage, " The Lord called John from 

the wave-tossing tempest of marriage." 

But I say that this bridegroom was not S. John. For S. John 

was always a virgin, and never married to a wife. For this reason 

he was most dear to Christ, and was "the disciple whom Jesus 

loved," a Virgin loving a virgin. He would never have broken 

his purpose of virginity by marriage 

; 

yea, he would never have 

thought of breaking it : but he remained constant to his purpose 

all through his life. This is the teaching of SS. Ignatius, Jerome, 

Augustine, and others. Wherefore, what S. Augustine has said, as 

quoted above, is to be understood not of marriage entered into, but 

of marriage about to be entered into, or rather that he might have 

entered into, and which, according to the custom of his nation, 

he ought to have entered into. Christ called the youthful John to 

Himself, that he might not think of marriage. 

With more probability, Baronius, following Nicephorus (Hist. I. 

8. c. 30), thinks that the bridegroom at this marriage was the 

Apostle Simon, who was surnamed the Cananite from Cana. And 

Baronius adds from the same Nicephorus that the place where the 

marriage was celebrated was adorned by a famous church built there 

by S. Helena, the mother of Constantine the Great. As soon as 

Simon had seen this miracle of Christ at his wedding, he bade 

farewell to his bride and the world, and followed Him, and was 

chosen to be one of His twelve Apostles. This was the reason why 

Christ came to this wedding ; and by coming, indeed, honoured 

marriage ; but by calling him to Himself, He showed that celibacy 

and the apostolate were better than marriage.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyFoZfiB5xG4xNHKK8xAEW5YLNiGWKX7ssXRhodyHUJbZW0Fob7q_RYM7Lpm6-z2-eGRe0wDTg7W9nSVRFUJDeLlZCQkkkZIExgMx_eMzUF9d-Y5YSmG0iZ8ezHPb2ASTQnhQyusA=w615-h900-v0

e0ec17ec-ea32-4ff1-8b6b-4806d4bb9081

THE SPIRITUAL fiRIDE. 8 

 

Tropologically, a holy soul by faith, hope, chastity, and charity 

is like a bride married to Christ. She becomes the bride of Christ, 

who, leaving all the allurements of the world, transfers her whole 

love to Christ, and for Him covers and veils her head, that is, her 

mind, and all her senses, so as to converse with Him continually 

above the clouds in heaven, and dedicates and consecrates her 

whole self to Him. With this idea the etymology of nuptials, as 

given by Festus, most admirably agrees. Some he says derive nup-

tics from the Greek, for the Greeks call a bride vuft<f>n. S. Isidore, 

however, derives nuptice from obnubere, to cover, because women 

when married were accustomed to cover their head with a veil. 

An unmarried woman, on the contrary, was called innuba, or one 

whose head was not covered. 

Such a bride of Christ was S. Dympna, virgin and martyr, who, 

on account of her beauty, being asked in marriage of her father, an 

Irish king, fled into Brabant, and was beheaded by her own father 

at a town called Geel, not far from Antwerp. Thus she died a 

noble martyr for chastity. Therefore those who are possessed, and 

visit her sacred relics, are delivered from the devil. I myself once 

visited her shrine, and did her reverence. 

Cana of Galilee. This is added to distinguish it from another 

Cana, or Chana, which was situated in the tribe of Aser, near Sidon. 

Hence it was called Cana of the Sidonians, though it also was 

in Galilee. And the woman of Canaan, from whose daughter 

Christ drove out the demon, was an inhabitant of it. But this Cana 

where the marriage took place was in the tribe of Zabulon, above 

the valley of Cas-melon, and about three leagues from Nazareth. 

(So Jerome in Locis Hebr.) 

And the Mother, &c. "She was invited as a friend by those who 

were celebrating the marriage," says Euthymius. For Simon the 

Cananite, who was the bridegroom, was the son of Cleophas, the 

brother of Joseph the husband of the Blessed Virgin. There is 

no mention of Joseph in this place, nor subsequently ; for he was 

now dead, as S. Epiphanius {Hceres. 78), Baronius, and others 

gather from the silence of this passage. 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyKSKcgOwUJ1bpqIQIEpiMB39u2rQ_hMyyKZXL44z9KQnvU1LEZVbSYnthQlC3-Yvx6LOyOS0xQKEPeuSrJAtlb0QvMbL1bDAvrZF5QeGW5JvVFcEHZDfiz2GoMwrmNWEU-VrlZGQ=w615-h900-v0

367b3bec-ddc5-45af-b61a-65c6b45a634e

82 S. JOHN, C. II. 

Jesus also was called, as the cousin of the bridegroom. " Jesus 

being called," says S. Chrysostom, "was present at the marriage, not 

having regard to His dignity, -but to our profit." He was present 

(i.) to pay respect to His kinsfolk, and to honour their nuptials by 

His presence. 2. To give an example of humility, in being present 

at the marriage of poor people. As S. Chrysostom says, " He who 

did not disdain to take the form of a servant, was not ashamed to 

be present at the wedding of servants." Or, as S. Augustine says 

(de Verb. Bom., Serm. 41), " Let man blush to be proud, since 

God became humble. Behold, He came to the marriage, who, when 

He was with the Father, instituted marriage." 3. That by the 

miracle He might make Himself known to His disciples, and show 

them that He was the Messiah. 4. That He might give His 

sanction to marriage, and sanctify it by His presence, and so con-

demn the Encratites, and the followers of Tatian, who were to arise 

in after times, and revile marriage as a filthy invention of the devil. 

So SS. Austin, Cyril, and Bede. Hear what this last says {Horn, in 

Domin. 2, post Epiph.) : "If there were any fault to be found with 

wedlock, duly and chastely celebrated, the Lord would not have 

been present at a marriage. Good is holy wedlock, better is the 

continence of widowhood, best of all is perfect virginity. Thus 

Christ was born of a virgin ; He was blessed by the prophetic lips 

of the widow Anna ; He came an invited guest to a wedding." 

And His disciples. You will ask, Who were these disciples ? For 

Jesus did not gather together His apostles until after the imprison-

ment of S. John the Baptist : and this had not then taken place. 

I reply, it is probable they were Nathanael and Philip, and per-

haps Andrew and Peter. For they had visited Jesus three days 

before, and for a time adhered to Him as their Master; though 

afterwards they went back to their fishing until they were called to 

the apostolate. 

And when wine failed, Greek, uertgqsavroi, was deficient, because the 

bridegroom, being poor, had only provided a little, the Mother of 

Jesus, &c. As though she said, " Our relations, the bride and bride-

groom, have no wine. Consider their modesty, O my Son, that

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxH2EmdHgDZsrOPCDKclc4u-va-QEccs5Hv9qJRrYgKEpbSoPN3LF-1EwHsX-pj-JDu6G4UevXx-NZabHhtp0RXM9hh3EoisHdIJ-8Ndx_iI_lmlb4SyMl5NzW7h0vZTE3paOYoTQ=w615-h900-v0

bf781fac-1e9b-46b1-9036-3214bab25bbb

REQUEST OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. 83 

they be not put to shame before their guests. I know Thou art 

able to do this, for Thou art the Son of God, and it is becoming 

both to Thy kindness and Thy providence, so that by now perform-

ing a miracle Thou mayest make manifest both to Thy disciples and 

all the guests that Thou art the Messiah." So S. Cyril. 

Observe the modesty of the Virgin. She does not bid, or even 

ask. She does not say, My Son, provide wine for them. She did 

not doubt that Jesus in His providence and love would provide it. 

Hear what S. Bernard says {Serm. 2, de B. Virg.) : " Those words 

of hers are a most sure index of innate meekness, and virgin 

modesty. Accounting the reproach of others her own, she could 

not bear it; she could not profess ignorance of the wine having 

failed. When indeed she was reproved by her Son, forasmuch as 

she was meek and lowly in heart, she neither answered again, nor 

yet despaired. She only bade the servants do what He told them." 

Moreover, the Mother having a certain confidence that she would 

obtain, here tacitly asks her Son to procure wine. During the 

thirty years that they had lived together in close companionship she 

Aad learnt from Him that He had been sent by the Father, that, by 

His heavenly doctrine and miracles, He might convert men to 

Himself and God. It is impossible to doubt that when Christ bade 

good-bye to His Mother, when He was going to John's baptism, 

and after that to enter upon His office of preaching, He had 

expressly told His Mother the same. Wherefore, she deeming that 

the present was a fitting occasion for Jesus, by a miracle, to gain 

authority and belief in Himself, fearlessly asked for a miracle, not 

doubting that Christ would perform it, and by so doing would 

gratify His Mother and His relations, and would advance His own 

office and dignity. 

Ver. 4. 

 

AndJesus saith, What is it to Me and to thee, &c. Mean-

ing, What have I to do with thee in this matter? {Quid mihi tecum 

in hac re est negotiif) Observe, the Blessed Virgin did not out of 

ostentation, or in an untimely, unbecoming, or indiscreet fashion 

ask this miracle of her Son, as S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and 

Euthymius think : but out of necessary charity and piety, as SS.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxit7eZp85qTJl50X4fSeV44a7DCCRBlw_IFCcvdfbOCgVeKigX3rvgHXu7bR1mOs0376R03LP8ZlLtIdypNv5TV-oBiP5CflmAm2DlXvIHX_W5tJr5pP_QNlMvBJL8LgjtaGIh_A=w615-h900-v0

e700e6a0-e433-4215-9895-114867b560d6

84 S. JOHN, C. II. 

Cyril, Bernard, and others say. Therefore there was no blame 

attaching to her. Therefore Christ did not really blame her. And 

yet He seems to reprove her, that He might teach, not her, but us, 

that in things pertaining to God, and miracles, parents have no 

right or authority. They must not be done in accordance with 

their affections and desires, but only for God and charity's sake. 

The meaning, therefore, is this, "Thou, O Mother, in this matter, 

art not My Mother, but as it were another woman. For, from thee 

I have received human nature, not Divinity. It belongs to My Divine nature to work this miracle, not in accordance with thy 

desires, and those of relations, but in accordance with the will of 

God My Father. According to that will I shall work, when the 

hour and time decreed by God shall come." Hear S. Augustine on 

this passage : " The word woman is used simply to express the 

female sex." " He, as God," says Euthymius, " said not ' Mother,' 

but 'woman.'" "He means," says S. Bede, "that He had not 

received in time from His Mother the Divinity by which He was 

about to perform a miracle, but that He had It eternally from the 

Father." " He means to say," says the Interlinear Gloss, " What is 

there in common between My Divinity and thee My Mother accord-

ing to the flesh ? " " Thou didst not beget, or produce (genuisti) 

My Divinity, which works the miracle," says S. Augustine. S. Chry-

sostom adds, " He speaks thus, lest the miracle should seem to be the 

result of collusion. He should have been asked by those who needed 

the wine, not by His Mother." 

Mine hour, &c, i.e., when I may appropriately work this miracle. 

I wish to wait a little while until the wine has wholly failed, that all 

the guests may perceive the miracle more clearly, and that all 

may know that I have wrought it, and so may believe in Me. For 

he who does not experience the need, will not greatly feel the 

necessity. So S. Chrysostom. The same S. Chrysostom gives 

another explanation : " Mine hour is not yet come, because I pro-

posed to work My first miracle in Jerusalem, the capital of Judea : 

nevertheless at thy prayers, O My Mother, I will change My purpose, 

and will do it here in Cana of Galilee."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyZMaYrBFnQgwQhLDUw6n_Gv1SePECoC42xn4ZYNgKT3poOCbPf1afsZYBv81ze7i_9xwf00EHZUHWKR4IgbVPkoczjp9ZRYciG-6aSPhJAPqkpAkvzu_6KV_YLzdWFmkd7KC6mJg=w615-h900-v0

f6ef8062-f275-4199-9bfe-52ef463cef3d

MODESTY OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. 85 

S. Augustine gives another explanation, to the following effect 

 

The hour of My passion is not yet come, in which I will show what 

I have to do with thee My Mother, that indeed I have of thee truly 

assumed man's nature, and that I am thy Son. When in the weak-

ness of My human nature, of which thou art the Mother, I shall 

hang upon the cross, then I will acknowledge thee. For He com-

mended her then to His disciple. 

Ver. 5. 

 

His Mother saiih, &c. His mother modestly holds her 

peace, and rightly yields to her Son, as being the Son of God. 

Although the Son seems to deny His Mother, the Mother knows His 

filial piety. Therefore with all confidence she bids the servants what 

to do. S. Gaudentius comments in these words, " The Mother would 

not have said, Whatsoever He saith unto you do it, unless being full of 

the Holy Ghost from her birth she had foreseen the whole process 

of Christ's turning the water into wine." Wherefore S. Bernard on 

these words {Horn. 2) says, " I .see plainly that it was not as being 

wroth, or as wishing to confound the shrinking modesty of His 

Virgin Mother, that He said, What have I to do with thee, but for our 

sakes, that the care of parents according to the flesh should not 

trouble those who are converted to the Lord." For Christ pre-

sently obeys His Mother, and to honour her performs the miracle. 

Hear S. Chrysostom : " Although He answered thus, yet He com-

plied with His Mother's prayer, that He might give honour to her, 

and not seem stubborn {contumax) to her, nor put her to shame 

when so many were present." And Euthymius says, " How very 

greatly He honoured her is plain from many other reasons, and also 

from this, that He fulfilled her exhortation." 

Moreover, in these words of the Virgin her meekness, piety, 

charity, prudence, faith, constancy, and greatness of soul wonderfully 

shine forth. 

Ver. 6. There were set, &c. Christ then made use of these water-

fots that it might be the more clearly evident that they had no wine 

in them ; and so the turning the water into wine in such vessels 

might be the more conspicuous. 

Purification : by which the Jews according to their traditions were

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzOMLbhUrKMt9dI-JvF9Gf9R9BXwTZhpc3nJkdtZew2n_I--EjjLnvF720swZ3kkIKCWuGgc9P4KP36QsDXl1fXCfWyUCLjF94Qw96qGJLlq628TarwPH6fBXM8AAkYM_O1asPcDA=w615-h900-v0

bc766e62-8444-4278-bba7-bbe16a19c0ed

86 S. JOHN, C. II. 

accustomed at their feasts ceremonially to wash their hands, if they 

happened to touch anything unclean at the table. (See S. Mark 

vii. 3.) 

Tropologically, S. Bernard expounds thus (Serm. 1, in Domin. 1, 

post. Oct. Epiph.) : The six waterpots are the six purifying virtues 

of the soul. " The first waterpot, and the first cleansing, is in com-

punction, of which we read, that in the very hour in which the 

sinner shall groan, I will no more remember all their iniquities. 

The second is confession ; for all things are washed by confession. 

The third is the giving of alms ; for we read in the Gospel, ' Give 

alms, and behold all things are clean unto you.' The fourth, forgive-

ness of injuries ; for we say when we pray, ' Forgive us our debts, 

for we also forgive those who are indebted to us.' The fifth is 

affliction of the body ; for we pray that we, being purified by 

abstinence, may sing glory to God. The sixth is obedience to the 

commandments : even as the disciples heard what may we too 

deserve to hear, ' Ye are clean through the word which I have spoken 

unto you.'" He then applies the rest as follows: " They are filled 

with water, that they may be kept in the fear of God, since the fear 

of the Lord is a fountain of life." Then he adds : " But by the 

Divine power the water is changed into wine when perfect love 

casts out fear. Now the waterpots are said to be of stone, not 

because of hardness, but for steadfastness ; for they contained two 

or three firkins apiece." 

Two or threefirkins—Greek, measures. This measure was the same 

as the Hebrew ephah, or bath. 

Ver. 'j.—Jesus saith, &c. S. Chrysostom asks, "But why did not He Himself fill the waterpots with water, and then turn it into wine ? 

" 

He gives the right answer, saying, in order that He might have them 

as witnesses to the miracle who had drawn the water, lest any fraud 

or trickery should be supposed. 

To the brim: lest, if any vacant space were left, Christ might 

have been supposed to have poured wine on the top of the water, 

which might have communicated the flavour of wine to the water 

underneath.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyJ6aRp2i_Hetmn7EaotsMZjzXJh-ellY5e5l4kiQnxFPdqmF9s-faSCXV8Tj7fHThjGeL4100s3YgN3PrUHSH7U2Xr1uO4IF6U7Fo7mzKANuXgc-lz9TCVIUPqezAkQ7N0mIWFLw=w615-h900-v0

61e9a721-3c8c-4c90-b8a3-f43ac93ca5ae

WATER CHANGED TO WINE. 87 

Ver. 8. 

 

AndJesus satth, &c. Draw out of the great waterpots, and 

pour into smaller vessels, and carry it to the master of the feast, 

and let him judge how good the wine is. As Christ said this, He 

in one moment by His Almighty power changed the whole of the 

water in the six waterpots into wine. Listen to Nonnus : " Sud-

denly was the miracle wrought; and the water, changing its colour, 

flowed with a ruddy glow instead of its own pale colour, and was 

changed into purple wine." As S. Cyril says, " What is difficult to 

Almighty God, or why should not He, who called all things into 

being out of nothing, much* more easily change one thing into 

another?" 

From this conversion of water into wine, the Fathers prove the 

conversion of bread and wine in the Eucharist into the Body and 

Blood of Christ. And they add that it seems to be a greater 

miracle for Christ to turn water into wine than wine into blood. 

For wine is nearer akin to blood than water is to wine. So S. 

Cyril ofJerusalem 

( 

Cat. 4), S. Cyprian {Epist. cont. Aquar.), S. Irenseus 

(/. 3, c. 11). S. Isidore of Pelusium asks (/. 1, Epist. 393) why 

Christ willed this to be His first miracle? He gives the answer 

mystically, that it was because He wished to supply what was 

wanting to the Law. "For the Law," he says, "only baptized 

with water, but He perfected the sacred initiation with His own 

Blood, joining both in Himself, and uniting the Law with grace." 

For water was the symbol of the old Law, which purified all things 

by water, but only with a corporeal cleansing. But wine is the 

symbol of the Blood of Christ, which, being shed upon the cross, 

cleanses souls. For Christ changes wine into His own Blood in 

the Eucharist. Christ, therefore, by changing water into wine at 

the beginning of His preaching, signified that He was about to 

change the Law of Moses, which was as cold and insipid as water, 

into the Gospel of His grace. 

Master of the feast. S. Gaudentius says, that when marriages 

were celebrated amongst the Jews, a priest was assigned to preside 

over the proper ceremonies. The same person took care of con-

jugal modesty and ordered the provision for the feast, and the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyajbFRhc8HvINLY2BsQP-JSFJyRJrrVo3pJLXGgyIX9NUzAD3Bz1zsQOMBLHMd5fe1jEm4KBjxRPEQbXTI2tXYtVv734raj7Aemh1dXiC0cb5weGi1qFIIa9suj7QN1QhA-QoDmA=w615-h900-v0

cf89b6c9-e12b-4a1d-b719-6f8b72c3adb8

88 S. JOHN. C. II. 

ministers ; wherefore he was called the master, or governor of the 

feast. Christ therefore orders that the water which had been made 

wine should be borne to this master of the feast, because he by his 

office was a most sober and responsible person, and also well skilled 

in the flavour of wine. Therefore he was the best able to judge of 

the excellence of this wine, and to make known Christ's miracle 

unto all. 

They bore it. It is probable that Christ turned the water into 

red wine, both because red wine is the only kind used in Palestine, 

and also that it might be the more evident that the water had been 

changed into wine. They bore then with joy, gladly obeying, and 

contributing their part to this miracle of Christ. For their prompt 

obedience in drawing the water contributed not a little to this 

miracle. 

Ver. 9.— When the governor of thefeast, &c. Tasted: he did not 

give credit entirely to the smell and ruddy colour, but he tasted, and 

found that it was the very best and most excellent wine. For 

tasting was the surest way of judging. 

And when men are inebriated (Vulg.), well drunk (Eng. Vers.), i.e., 

exhilarated. For intoxication in Scripture often means a liberal 

draught which gladdens the mind, but does not deprive it of the 

use of reason. For if these guests had been really drunk, surely 

Jesus would never have turned water into wine for them, for then 

He would have assisted and encouraged their drunkenness. Much 

rather would He have put a stop to their potations, and sent them 

home. And the Blessed Virgin would have done the same. 

Then that which is worse : because, when the stomach is filled 

with wine, it is a poor judge of the quality. This is a type of the 

deceitfulness of the world, which at the beginning presents things 

that are fair to the eye, and afterwards brings in what is vile and 

worthless, and so deceives and deludes its lovers. 

But thou hast kept, &c. Hence it is plain that this wine was 

most excellent as being the work of Christ, and therefore Divine. 

For the works of God are perfect. Thus the loaves which Christ 

multiplied to feed the four thousand were as sweet as manna. And

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwBb708UOdiI3L_AmisJs-l3T7-naSc78cRiy0KA1oCHcT6e4tk6K4jFfK8zbVOCvCvmq6HHLdD0FNDpHqPFUqoziboxxd99zqq_NeLuzSpueYLMs5ag2EDvcj28oRyofHhuu0-=w615-h900-v0

4390bac8-b8b0-4ab1-964d-5ec7f1952760

VERIFICATION OF THE MIRACLE. 89 

S. Chrysostom says that the limbs of those persons which Christ 

restored became stronger than they were originally. 

All these things were wisely ordered by Christ, so that the 

miracle might be perfectly well attested. For the master of the 

feast called the bridegroom, and asked him from whence was this 

wine. He replied that he knew nothing about it. Then, learning 

from the servants the sequence of what had been done, they came 

to the waterpots, and found them all full of the best wine. Where-

upon they burst forth in praise of Jesus as the author of the miracle, 

and their benefactor, and made known what had been done to all 

the guests. Jesus, avoiding vainglory, retired, first admonishing them 

to use this wine with moderation, to the praise of God, with giving 

of thanks to Him. 

Ver. 11. 

 

This beginning, &c. 

; 

glory, i.e., His Omnipotence and 

Divinity. And believed, i.e., their faith grew. 

Beginning. From hence the Fathers gather passim that this 

miracle was absolutely the first which Christ publicly wrought. This 

is the refutation of the book on the " Infancy of the Saviour," con-

demned by Pope Gelasius, which was forged by the heretics ; and 

in which it is related that Christ publicly wrought miracles when He 

was yet a boy. Yet there is no reason, says Maldonatus, against 

our thinking that Christ may have wrought miracles privately before, 

and may by them have assisted the poverty of His parents. It 

might seem as if His Mother, animated by the recollection of 

such, had here asked for, and expected, a similar miracle. But 

Christ could have relieved His Mother's wants by some special 

providence short of a miracle. 

You will ask why Christ willed this to be His first miracle ? I 

reply, because it was especially appropriate to the time, the place, 

and the persons. For wine is the most noble beverage, which 

makes glad both God and man (Judges ix. 13). Wherefore Noah, 

immediately after the Deluge, discovered wine, and was a type of 

Christ here making wine. Again, Christ by this miracle showed 

that He is the self-same Being who, year by year, does the same 

thing in the vines by converting their watery sap into wine. " The

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzqMTfjOJ_pn0ThssntoOG937ZRI09wVl_oJ19WeucJQsU3cXOnO4K26SwXov7aGye9PYgeIFuB_-WVou4feVhfqHuQpVW1H8M1XwrYC8_A5aPPeZuWVBk3t5tGL_iosSZ3sMvu=w615-h900-v0

3e4b72e8-1695-4518-8c5a-17aac6f6a601

go S. JOHN, C. II. 

only difference is," as S. Chrysostom says, "that in the vine-tree He 

effects by a process extending over a considerable time what He 

did at the marriage in a moment." For what else is wine but water 

changed by the rays of the sun ? 

The symbolical reason is, because wine is the most fitting symbol 

of the grace, charity, devotion, fervour, strength, with which Christ 

indues His own. Whence S. Bernard says {in Sentent.), "The wine 

in the cup of God has a threefold colour. It is red in the long-

suffering of the saints. This made Isaac glad in his sickness. It 

is white in the recompense of the just. With this was Noah inebri-

ated. It is black and sour in the damnation of the wicked. Of 

this Jesus tasted, but would not drink." 

Allegorically, the reason was because this marriage represented 

the marriage union of Christ with human nature, which took place 

in His Incarnation. Wherefore it was celebrated on the third day, 

that is, in the third stage of the world. For the first state was the 

law of nature, the second was the law of Moses, the third is the law 

of Christ. It was done in Galilee of the Gentiles, because Christ 

calls all the Gentiles to His marriage with our humanity. Also it 

was done in Cana of Galilee, i.e., in the transmigration of the posses-

sion, or the Christian people, which is Christ's possession, bought 

with His own Blood, and therefore it passes from earth to heaven. 

In His possession Christ gives wine, i.e., the doctrine and grace of 

the Gospel, which makes glad and inebriates the soul. Here also 

He changes wine into His Blood in the Eucharist. 

Tropologically, the reason was that by these nuptials and by wine 

He signified the union, and as it were the marriage of our soul, 

through grace and charity, with God. The Mother of Jesus was 

there, that is, virginal chastity, and the simple faith of the disciples 

of Jesus, such faith as when humbly acknowledging the wine of our 

devotion and fervour is failing, we entreat Him to bestow it upon us. 

Then He changes the insipidity of our soul into the good wine of 

His heavenly grace, by which we refresh and inebriate, not only our-

selves, but others, and make them to glow with the love of God. 

Anagogically, the marriage of the Lamb will be perfected in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw-Qati61A8uYPe7qVAor5yEKn6kBwogB5SGwdAOdrI-1W3yLtdLzNg8iJTkS4ktB_p5efJ0oEsiBUkQ7rm2X0-xD-kfVqzazDvu1XbpjP3CmiQWgDV3orevh7J_FIR_57vhyEMyw=w615-h900-v0

fb7dc48b-b691-4837-af14-8f339209481c

CHRIST LEAVES NAZARETH. 9 

 

heaven. There Christ will give us new wine and Divine nectar. 

He will inebriate us out of the fatness of the house of God, and 

will give us to drink of the torrent of His pleasures. 

Ver. 12. 

 

After this Jesus went down, &c. After the marriage 

Jesus returned with His Mother and friends to their house at Naza-

reth. Nazareth was situated upon higher ground, so that He would 

descend from it to Capharnaum, which was on ground sloping down 

to the Sea of Galilee. The reason why He went was because He 

did not wish to make Nazareth, a poor and ignoble town, and by 

whose inhabitants He was despised as a carpenter, and the son 

of a carpenter, the headquarters of His preaching. For this He 

destined Capharnaum, which was by the sea-side, and famous for 

its commerce and concourse of people, so that He might have 

more fruit of His ministry. 

Now this journey of Christ took place before the imprisonment of 

John the Baptist, as may be clearly gathered from chaps, iii. 24 and 

iv. 1. It was different therefore from that of which S. Matthew 

speaks (iv. 13). For that took place after John was put in prison, when 

Christ actually transferred His place of abode to Capharnaum, and 

there opened a public school of His doctrine and teaching. The pre-

sent occasion was only preparatory. This visit was only by the way, 

as it were in transitu, intending to proceed from hence to Jerusalem 

to keep the Passover, which was now nigh at hand. So Jansen. 

AndHis brethren, i.e., His cousins, James the Less, Joseph, Simon, 

and Judas (Matt. xiii. 55). Also John and James the Greater. 

And the Passover, &c. This was the first Passover after Christ's 

baptism. 

Vers. 14, 15, 16.—And He found in the Temple, &c. I have 

explained all these things in S. Matthew xxi. 1 2. Observe, however, 

that this was a different driving out of the buyers and sellers from 

that recorded in the 21st of S. Matthew, which occurred very shortly 

before Christ's passion. But this took place at the very beginning 

of His ministry. 

Ver. 17. His disciples remembered, &c. This zeal of Christ was 

rignteous indignation, says Euthymius, or rather ardour to do away

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyunJ74KokYhmjBRIjdSQrimip_sbQDC3RgqvokCSWdIdA2rLH1Hq0kLYzdTUhq3op4lhHtBTll5NjEsOzcb99UeRWVjVJKRgj6vaCOmZ6EVgGhSxlSiLPV7qn4qFeZJRQ8BtK_CA=w615-h900-v0

a839981c-d0f2-4d95-81d9-1eab297e313c

92 S. JOHN, C. II. 

with what was repugnant to God's honour, so that He boldly 

exposed Himself, His life and His good name, to defend the honour 

of God, whom He loved above all things. For Christ did this before 

the proud and covetous Scribes and Pharisees, who opposed Him. 

The meaning then is, " The zeal, that is, the burning desire, of caring 

for the glory of Thy Temple, in which thou, O Lord, dwellest as 

Thine abode, and the indignation which I have conceived against 

the traders who profane it, have eaten, that is, have absorbed Me." 

Symmachus translates consumed Me, as fire eats away iron, and so 

transmutes it into itself, that it no longer seems to be iron, but fire 

itself. 

S. Augustine asks, "Who is eaten up with zeal for the house of 

God ? " and answers, " He who strives to amend everything which he 

sees amiss. He does not rest if he cannot rectify it. He groans 

and says within himself, ' My zeal has caused me to consume away 

because mine enemies have forgotten Thy words'" (Ps. cxix. 139). 

Wherefore Bede saith, on this passage, " Let us have zeal for the 

house of God, my brethren. If we see a brother who belongs to the 

house of God swelling with pride, given to detraction, a slave to 

drunkenness, enervated with luxury, disturbed by anger, or subject to 

any other fault, let us strive, so far as in us lies, to rebuke him, to 

amend what is corrupt and perverse. And if we are powerless to 

amend any of these things, let us not endure them without the most 

bitter grief. And especially in the house of prayer, where the Body 

of God is consecrated, where without doubt the angels are always 

present, let no folly take place, let us strive with all our might that 

nothing may hinder our own, or our brethren's prayers." 

Ver. 18.— TheJews therefore answered, &c. Meaning, what miracle 

dost Thou show, that Thou takest upon Thyself, contrary to the 

custom, to cast the sellers out of the Temple, as having received 

authority from God : for from man, that is, from pontiff or governor, we 

know Thou hast none ? For Christ had intimated that He was sent by 

God, yea, that He was the Son of God; for He had said (ver. 16), 

Make not My Fathe? 's house a house of merchandise. They ask Him therefore to prove that He was the Son of God, and Messiah, even

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAymomScNZyyMLGlCfxIOID-ZiAeEMypaKUA8yTLcXXppwsi6aKHcoKloMfI5cbdk30mVcub0nzB7JVd3B0hChvuEhmrJuLxwm-3IemPcVbfFkdpMHRww8Rja02jF21tMUjOM7gOhQ=w615-h900-v0

1f5b7ab0-89d1-467c-be9c-29aa65690838

THE LORD OF THE TEMPLE. 93 

as Moses had shown signs and prodigies from heaven, by which he 

demonstrated to Pharaoh and the Egyptians that he was sent by 

God. So Ruperti. 

Ver. xq.—Jesus answered, &c. Appositely does He prove His 

authority over the Temple by His power of rebuilding the Temple. 

This Temple, viz., His body, which Christ pointed out by moving 

His hand to His breast. Observe : the Body of Christ is called a 

temple because in It dwelt the fulness of the Deity, not merely by 

grace as it dwells in us, but corporeally and personally (Col. ii. 9). 

So S. Cyril. As though He said, "You, O ye incredulous Jews, 

ask of Me a sign, or a miracle ; lo, I give you one, even My resur-

rection from the dead. This thing is now indeed dark unto you, 

because ye are unbelieving. But after a little while ye will under-

stand it, or at least ye might easily understand, when ye shall see 

that I am risen on the third day. For then ye shall understand 

who I am, and how great I was, that I was in truth the Lord of My own Body, that of My own will I gave Myself to die, and rose to 

life again. Thus, in consequence, ye may understand that much 

more am I the Lord of this Temple, which is only a type and shadow 

of My Body ; and therefore that I have power to cast out of it the 

buyers and sellers." So Bede. 

Moreover, Christ calls his Body a temple rather than anything 

else because this contention took place in the Temple and about the 

Temple. As though He said, That ye may know, O ye Jews, that I 

am Lord of the Temple, loose ye, that is, I permit you to destroy the 

temple of My Body, which ye will do when ye kill and crucify Me, 

and I rise again by My own power on the third day. " Destroy ye" 

not as inciting them to His destruction ; but predicting in figurative 

language what He knew they were about to do. So Euthymius. 

Ver. 20. 

 

TheJews then said, &c. There were three buildings of 

the Temple of Jerusalem. The first was by Solomon, and occupied 

seven years. The second was the rebuilding after its destruction 

by the Babylonians, by Zorobabel and his companions, under Cyrus, 

King of Persia. This rebuilding occupied fifteen years only, though 

many ancient and modern writers have erroneously supposed it to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwH34_RklpPp2GxLN9AH0pIUgdIFJ0L_wiU1v5wUFeWmbpE4ojDDjvbn0RpNTh8YJhXChuaugncb8dRAjk-bDmikJmqubhhTBBic56EHZUPZuh0g2swDy5v9C3rx0f2E4QRspJE=w615-h900-v0

c94faa5e-5344-4712-be64-de8dddb3ab59

94 S. JOHN, C. II. 

have occupied forty-six years, and to have been here referred to by 

the Jews. The third was the rebuilding of the Temple by Herod of 

Ascalon, who murdered the innocents of Bethlehem. He built the 

Temple afresh for the Jews, in order that he might secure the 

kingdom for himself and his posterity, and that he might be 

accounted by them as the true Messiah. And it is exceedingly 

probable that the Jews were here referring to this rebuilding from 

their use of the pronoun this. For "this" points out an existing 

Temple. And inasmuch as the two former Temples were destroyed, 

they could not be thus pointed out. Herod began his erection of 

the third Temple in the eighteenth year of his reign. For it was at that 

time he made known his intention of rebuilding the Temple, as 

Josephus testifies {Ant., lib. 15, c. 14). Wherefore, since Christ was 

born in the thirty-fifth year of the reign of Herod, as I have shown 

on Luke ii. 1, it follows that from his beginning to build until the 

birth of Christ, sixteen years had elapsed. Add thirty years of the 

life of Christ and you have forty-six. For it was in His thirtieth 

year, in which also He was baptized, that Christ had this disputation 

with the Jews. 

You may say that Josephus, in the passage cited above, says that 

Herod completed the building of the Temple in eight years instead 

of forty-six. I answer that he finished building as far as the most 

important parts of the Temple, such as the holy place and the Holy 

of Holies, were concerned : but both he himself and his successors 

laboured for many years after, even to Christ's thirtieth year, in 

adorning the same. For in constructing the courts, the porticoes, 

and in beautifying the whole, inside as well as out, eighteen thou-

sand men laboured all that time, as the same Josephus records 

{Ant. 20, 8). 

Finally, some think that the Jews spoke of both Temples, viz., 

Zorobabel's and Herod's. For Herod did not so much build a 

new Temple as adorn the old Temple of Zorobabel, so as to make it 

loftier and grander. This Vilalpandus clearly proves from Hege-

sippus and other authors. The Temple then of Zorobabel occupied 

fifteen years in building. It was afterwards for several more years

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzk6ClSWZH9klzzuDGbPG9PX4yUmmKOJAdzPpnVwT3fjPsCk8QyKIrCGkSeGFmp63bASZWbBCNxCITx8w-eSV1zMZa9yphT2Qy4oOaHLAERai6HBPQM_JE5yY5byUQR2VCaxklLwA=w615-h900-v0

8e9a74d0-c24f-49ec-8929-e8a2e3e5df86

THE BUILDING OF THE TEMPLE. 95 

enlarged and adorned by the Maccabees, by Simon the son of Onias 

the High Priest (Ecclus. 1. 1), and by Herod. If you reckon up 

all these years you will easily make them come to forty-six years. 

Similarly the Basilica of S. Peter at Rome, the ancient one of Con-

stantine the Great having been destroyed, has occupied a hundred 

years in building, and even at the present time we see continually 

in process of erection turrets, altars, pillars, chapels, &c. 

Symbolically, the forty-six years of the building of the Temple 

signify that the Body of Christ was built up in as many days. Hear 

S. Augustine {de Trin., lib. 14, c. 5.) : "This number answers to the 

perfection of the Body of Christ ; for forty-six times six make two 

hundred and seventy-six, that is, nine months and six days ; for in 

so long time was the Body of Christ coming to perfection." The 

same {in Joan, tract. 10) says, " Christ received a body from Adam. 

Now the Greek for the east is avaroXri, for the west hbaig, for the 

north agxrog, for the south piarififigia., which four letters form Adam's 

name, even the elect who are to be gathered from the four winds 

when the Lord shall come to judgment. The letters also of Adam's 

name count for forty-six, according to the Greek numeration ; for 

alpha signifies one, delta four, alpha one, and mu forty, in all 

forty-six. Thus Bede, S. Cyprian, Clement of Alexandria, and 

others. 

Ver. 21. 

 

But He spake, &c. S. Chrysostom asks, "Why He did 

not explain to them, being in doubt, that He called His flesh the 

Temple?" and answers that "since they had no belief in Him, 

even if He had explained the Jews would have derided Him, and 

treated Him still worse." 

Ver. 22.— When therefore He was risen, &c. They believed the 

Scripture, which foretold that Christ would rise from the dead. This, 

which they did not previously understand, they understood when they 

saw it actually fulfilled in the resurrection of Christ. Such a Scripture 

is that verse of the Psalms (xvi. 10), "Thou shalt not leave My soul 

in hell, nor suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption." 

Ver. 23. But when He was atJerusalem, &c. They believed in 

His name, that is, that He bore truly the name of Messiah, or Christ,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxQNNngHqA1V4x-z3z32ELgSv3XF-6x3G3aV5UCx-47Xdd4btxBCAGwAFjntCyXfWN1mrjU7WGkPK2k9kmKhto7kSEgCHcpIonAWeJYJpydhsKZgEQaBq3V3YuoE19Ya9FFbFX-wQ=w615-h900-v0

a3c618fd-f55f-46fb-ae5a-fd84abeef4e2

96 S. JOHN, C. II. 

as He Himself named Himself, and was so publicly named and 

celebrated by the faithful. 

Ver. 24. 

 

But Jesus did not, &c. He did not trust, i.e., He did not 

confide. For although He knew that they believed in Him, yet 

He also knew that they were fickle, and would easily fall back from 

this faith, and be perverted by His numerous enemies, the Scribes 

and Pharisees. For the authority and power of those men was 

great. For this reason Christ neither securely, nor for long, con-

versed with them, but went away into other parts of Judea, for He 

knew not only what they were then doing and thinking, but what 

they were hereafter about to think and do against Him, to persecute 

Him even unto the death of the cross. 

Ver. 25. For He hadno need, &c. For He was searching the heart 

of each, whether it were constant, or fickle and inconstant. Where-

fore, as S. Chrysostom says, " He did not regard outward words who 

enters into the mind itself, who penetrates human thoughts, who 

knew how soon their fervour would grow cold. Jesus had no need 

of testimony to know the minds which He had formed." Augustine 

adds, "That the Maker knew better what was in His work than the 

work what was in itself. Man's Creator knew what was in man."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyqkS-JP-yOOhbhK1fHnaHbturlWlXlvATNQ5o6oOW2TML4tZqytGKRNWrJkdyvqs_qSfsYn7NG7gGsWn-6cTAuPde7kqWmFz8U7P2MLfPS1uXAoJCw8FmUfa-6CMY0fkkax7PZ4A=w615-h900-v0

38be56b8-6055-41c4-819e-16284e118246

( 97 ) 

CHAPTER III. 

I Christ teacheth Nieodemus the necessity of regeneration. 14 Of faith in His 

death. 16 The great love of God towards the world. 18 Condemnation for 

unbelief 23. The baptism, witness, and doctrine offohn concerning Christ. 

THERE was a man of the Pharisees, named Nieodemus, a ruler of the Jews : 

2 The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know 

that thou art a teacher come from God : for no man can do these miracles that 

thou doest, except God be with him. 

3 Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a 

man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. 

4 Nieodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old ? can he 

enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? 

5 Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of 

water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 

6 That which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that which is born of the Spirit 

is spirit. 

7 Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. 

8 The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but 

canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth : so is every one that is 

born of the Spirit. 

9 Nieodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be ? 

10 Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest 

not these things ? 

II Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that 

we have seen ; and ye receive not our witness. 

12 If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if 

I tell you o/"heavenly things ? 

13 And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from 

heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven. 

14 IT And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the 

Son of man be lifted up ; 

15 That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. 

16 IT For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that 

whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 

17 For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world ; but that 

the world through him might be saved. 

18 IT He that believeth on him is not condemned : but lie that believeth not is 

condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten 

Son of God. 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy5eiDWmX2oumwwibGfCsuBeswTH-l6IZD-IXspzH6fGnGvapyMkOyri4nYsUkRgYYazZ3nzAysU4WOXYmrHGrNujzg9Ok4HbIxLp5igye3QKK_dOOBGd1hv29-3VG56RnNtWALGg=w615-h900-v0

c7e650fa-df9b-43de-94c1-4b3fb4aa7a2b

98 S. JOHN, c. lit. 

19 And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men 

loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. 

20 For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, 

lest his deeds should be reproved. 

21 But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made 

manifest, that they are wrought in God. 

22 H After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea ; and 

there he tarried with them, and baptized. 

23 IT And John also was baptizing in ^Enon near to Salim, because there was 

much water there : and they came, and were baptized. 

24 For John was not yet cast into prison. 

25 IT Then there arose a question between some of John's disciples and the Jews about purifying. 

26 And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee 

beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all 

men come to him. 

27 John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. 

28 Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I 

am sent before him. 

29 He that hath the bride is the bridegroom : but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's 

voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled. 

30 He must increase, but I must decrease. 

31 He that cometh from above is above all : he that is of the earth is earthly, 

and speaketh of the earth : he that cometh from heaven is above all. 

32 And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth ; and no man receiveth 

his testimony. 

33 He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true. 

34 For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God : for God giveth 

not the Spirit by measure unto him. 

35 The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. 36 He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life : and he that believeth 

not the Son shall not see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him. 

There was a man, &c. Nicodemus means in Greek the conqueror 

of the people. Such was this man ; who, overcoming the fear of the 

people, the Pharisees, and the priests, believed in Christ. Wherefore Lucian thus writes concerning him in " The Invention of the Body of 

S. Stephen," from the mouth of Gamaliel: "The Jews, knowing that 

Nicodemus was a Christian, removed him from his office and cursed him, and drove him out of the city. Then I Gamaliel, inasmuch as 

he had suffered persecution for Christ's sake, took him to my estate, 

and fed and clothed him to the end of his life ; and when he died 

I buried him honourably beside the loved Stephen."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwEhdyyBMilgStUqUYwpDpQ0TJKMoBgmq9wKudgSm_R135HKvY5cTInso917lyQWh2E_nu2VXic7HbU2h85kqoR6XUzSVlwtHuz1Q03d_GHy13wk2eWSLV0Zcr0CX51SaJwx_bYgA=w615-h900-v0

373ab15f-7c39-45ce-abe7-2d818d5abd61

MEANING OF AMEN. 99 

Wherefore Nicodemus is enrolled among the saints in the Roman 

Martyrology on the 3d of August ; where we read as follows, 

" Invention of the body of S. Stephen, Protomartyr ; also of the 

bodies of SS. Gamaliel, Nicodemus, Abibo, &c, in the reign of 

Honorius." 

The same came, &c, by night, for he was ashamed to approach the 

lowly Jesus by day, in the presence of others, and to become His 

disciple. For he was a master in Israel : and such a thing seemed 

beneath his authority and dignity. Another reason was that he 

might not incur the hatred of the Pharisees, who despised Christ. 

However, he found the light which he sought by night, as Ruperti 

says, and drank of the great sacraments of salvation. He seems 

to have come alone, without servant or companion, by night, to 

Christ, to have spoken with Him face to face, and to have imbibed 

His spirit and doctrine. 

Thou art come a Teacher : Syriac, that Thou mayest be a Teacher, 

i.e., of the Jews. He does not say, Thou hast come that Thou mayest 

be the Messias, because about this he as yet felt no certainty. For 

Christ did not wish to enunciate this at the beginning of His preach-

ing, but made it known by degrees. 

These signs (Vulg.), these wonderful works which we have seen 

and heard that Thou hast done at the recent Passover, in the 

Temple ; as, for instance, that Thou alone didst drive out of it all 

that bought and sold in it. 

Except God be with him : except he be supported by the authority 

and omnipotence of God. For miracles are the works of God. 

They are not wrought by the power of men, or angels, but by God 

alone working supernaturally. 

Jesus answered, &c., Amen, Amen. John on many occasions 

doubles the Amen (Eng. Ver. Verily), when the other Evangelists have 

only one. Why was this? I answer (1.) because he had above the 

rest the most lofty revelations, and knew the deepest mysteries of 

the Deity. This was especially the case in his exile at Patmos, 

where he wrote the Apocalypse, which has, says S. Jerome, as many 

mysteries as it has words. And after this he wrote his Gospel when

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwPLlnQeW2UNh_M70ECK6T78kBbZVBj58ZYWsjIeOwVU_xEcSV0T6yuQuVkpQCEkjjCtoc2HHk81n45j6KHeIB9nK3yLZ8aYRTeFnBoVdVuyRajJen72pbQ-1M29yvyQWtwrQQNYQ=w615-h900-v0

79336853-b18e-4f42-b1c6-224fa6353e2f

TOO S. JOHN, C III. 

he was very old, and the sole survivor of the Apostolic College. 

Wherefore he was thenceforth the mouthpiece and oracle of the 

Church, the foundation and pillar of the faith, the patriarch of 

patriarchs. He saith therefore, as it were with plenary authority, 

as it were the Elder of elders, Amen, Amen. It is as though he said, 

" I announce to you, with the utmost weight and confidence, things 

most lofty and sublime, which surpass all human understanding 

and belief, but which Christ has revealed to me, which are there-

fore most certain, and most salutary for you. For Christ really 

used this twofold Amen, to indicate the sublimity and certainty 

of what He said. But the other Evangelists, studying conciseness, 

included two under one : but I, John, because I, beyond the 

others, have weighed and penetrated both the words of Christ and 

their meaning, say, Amen, Amen, as Christ Himself spoke." 

2. Because Amen is the same as Verily. S. John was delighted 

with the name of Truth. And this he calls Christ, because He was 

the Word, that is, the Truth of the Father. 

3. Because Amen is either a word signifying true, or else an 

adverb meaning truly. Wherefore we may explain thus—He who is 

the Amen, i.e., Christ, whose name is True, and the Truth, saith 

Amen, i.e., in truth, or most truly. Thus it is said in the Apocalypse 

(iii. 14), " Thus saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness,'' 

(Greek, ' h.mv), i.e., He who is the Amen; He who is steadfast, 

true, constant, faithful ; who is steadfastness itself, Truth itself, 

Faithfulness itself. 

4. Amen, Amen, denotes the perfect truth and certainty of the 

matter and the things which are recorded by S. John. The things 

which I say are most true and certain, more true than all other 

truths, more certain than all other certainty. 

5. By Amen, Amen, he intimates a twofold manner of certainty, 

viz., that S. John knew the things which he wrote by means of a 

twofold knowledge, natural and Divine ; that is, by experience and 

revelation. For with his eyes he saw these things, and with his 

ears he heard them, and by Christ's revelation, when he lay upon 

His breast, he understood them. Wherefore in his first Epistle he

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyolXzBEB4zxPAH6ZC43xMJT2QT1kSNnUUQ2726JqWFMKRC0k9CrU5mFdJZVJnotPZxSILAMbJsUxW20yVTlm-cfc5P2SH1l-DDqnKpfM3cYKf3hBpmj31phXmBgsKZ6NnMtRoemw=w615-h900-v0

050d5fa0-bf05-4466-b1a5-7c7201d44f61

THE SECOND BIRTH. 101 

thus writes, "What we have seen and heard, and our hands have 

handled we make known unto you." 

Except one be born again. Observe that John leaves us to gather 

from this answer that Nicodemus, either tacitly or expressly, asked 

Christ to teach him the way to the kingdom of heaven which He 

preached. For Christ answers by saying that baptism was the way 

to heaven. 

Again : Greek, uvwOiv, which has a twofold meaning, i. From 

above, from heaven, meaning, Except any one be born again by a 

heavenly and Divine regeneration, he cannot enter into the kingdom 

of God. 2. avufc* signifies again, a second time. And it is plain 

that it is so to be understood here from the answer of Nicodemus, 

ver. 4. So S. Chrysostom and others. The Syriac translatesfrom 

the beginning. And the meaning is, man has two births, one which 

is natural and carnal, in which he is brought forth under the bond 

of original sin. Wherefore this birth does not give a man a title to 

heaven, but to hell. In order therefore that a man may be freed 

from this sin contracted through his natural birth, a second and 

spiritual birth must be experienced, by which he must in baptism 

be born again of water and of the Spirit, and so be cleansed and 

sanctified from sin. 

Cannot see, i.e., possess, enjoy. 

Ver. 4. 

 

Nicodemus saith, &c. " He knew," says S. Augustine, 

"but of one birth, that from Adam and Eve." 

Ver. 5.—;fesus answered, &c. Calvin, in order to detract from the 

effect of justification by baptism, and therefore from the necessity of 

baptism (for he maintains that the children of believers are justified 

in the womb simply because they are the children of believers), 

denies that baptism is here spoken of. He says that by water, not 

water is to be understood, but the Holy Ghost, who, through faith, 

cleanses like water those who believe in Christ. He explains as 

follows, " unless any one be born again of water, and (that is, of) the 

Holy Ghost." Thus he says it is similarly spoken (S. Matt. Hi. 11), 

He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, i.e., with the 

Holy Spirit, who, like fire, shall inflame you with the love of God.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyi6Mg0oeRJhUxGl628tAZCpUIASVqbPpmu4epdpyI0nyFxAAksTm-2YzxK_k6AsO9GxKGxto6-EzoSC3Z7eSORUeUgJyclVB6vMQ_fiC5GqFiHM-gfSR4Ub10PtkZQR_1NeRjukQ=w615-h900-v0

5eef5a2c-e9d0-43a1-9e74-396397c4c388

102 S. JOHN, C. III. 

But all this is absurd and perverse, and condemned by the Church 

as heretical. 

For, in the first place, why does Christ here make mention of 

water, if not men, but only fishes, are born again of water? Why 

did He not say briefly and simply to Nicodemus, who was ignorant 

of Christian doctrines (whom He here catechises and instructs like 

a child), except any one be born again of the Holy Ghost 1 

2. Because in a similar way S. Paul, alluding to this conversation, 

(Titus iii. 5), calls baptism the laver of regeneration. There in this 

spiritual birth we are born again of water, and are made sons of 

God, who before were children of the devil and wrath (Eph. ii. 3). 

3. If it be lawful with Calvin to wrest this passage, then we may 

do the same with every other passage, and so pervert the whole of 

Scripture. No commandment will survive, not even the institution 

of baptism itself. 

4. Calvin and his followers cannot possibly prove against the 

Anabaptists that infants, who are devoid of the exercise of reason 

and faith, ought to be baptized, from any other passage of Holy 

Scripture but this. Therefore, since they do not allow of tradition, 

they must needs prove infant baptism from this passage, unless they 

are willing to confess themselves vanquished by the Anabaptists. 

5. All the Fathers and orthodox interpreters explain the passage 

in the same way as the Council of Trent (Sess. 7, Can. 2). Nor are 

the words in S. Matthew, " He shall baptize you with the Holy 

Ghost and with fire," any contradiction. For there real fire is to be 

understood, as here true water. For there the day of Pentecost was 

referred to, when the Holy Ghost came down upon the apostles in 

the likeness of tongues of fire. 

Very appropriately, moreover, was water ordained by Christ in 

baptism for this spiritual regeneration. 1. Because water excel-

lently represents inward regeneration. For out of water at the 

beginning of the world were the whole heavens and all other things 

born and produced. 2. Because moisture, such as is in water, is 

a chief agent in the production of offspring, as physicists teach. 

Again, because justification is a cleansing of the soul from the filth

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxwFb6u7OKPJ8jjIGk2d-yZ7eUxbCIkGCUO_zbVBPeBrb1HClWKUdNEQwG-mmJgajV8jYCN1zxvVMcS1NEoOqNqp5VVuJvr9OXxkA8MUdfNeJT3EnVSOAHNsEJI77huUGfpXpKsIg=w615-h900-v0

2dc45bc8-7f5a-40ea-819a-0ee83cb37d1d

BORN OF WATER. IO3 

of sin it is well figured by water. As S. Chrysostom says upon this 

passage, " Like as it were in a tomb our heads are submerged beneath 

the water : our old man being buried is hidden beneath the water, 

and then the new man ariseth in its stead." Lastly, the common-

ness and abundance of water makes it to be convenient matter 

for the necessity of this sacrament. For it is everywhere easily 

procurable. 

You may ask why Christ says, except a man be born of water and 

the Holy Ghost, and did not rather say, of water and the form of 

baptism ? For water is the matter of baptism, but the form is, / 

baptize thee in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the 

Holy Ghost. For the sacrament of baptism consists of its matter 

and form, as its essential parts. I reply, because Christ wished to 

describe to Nicodemus, a prejudiced old man, the new teaching of 

spiritual life and generation, by means of the analogy and similitude 

of natural generation, in which a father and mother concur. So 

in like manner to spiritual regeneration, which takes place in bap-

tism, water as it were the mother concurs, and the Holy Ghost as 

the Father. For He is the chief agent and producer of grace and 

holiness, by which the children of God are born again in baptism. 

From this passage S. Augustine (lib. 1, de peccat. c. 10) proves, 

against Pelagius, that infants are born in original sin. For that is 

the reason why they must be born again in baptism, that they may 

be cleansed from that sin. And he exposes the folly of the 

Pelagians, who, in order to elude the force of this passage, said 

that infants dying without baptism would enter into the kingdom of 

heaven and eternal life, but not into the kingdom of God ; as if the 

kingdom of God were something different from the kingdom of 

heaven. 

Lastly, born of water ought here to be understood either in 

actual fact, or by desire. For he who repents of his sins, and 

desires to be baptized, but either from want of water, or lack of a 

minister, is not able to receive it, is born again through (ex) the 

desire and wish for baptism. So the Council of Trent fully explains 

this passage (Sess. 7, Can. 4).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxxEd9zfByTuwU0V6sHvXudCqs5QgpzI6tNxmrvsPhpk4IqnmEm9rR5w4MDM-m0r2J2NABNGNQcWZPaEhBPUb2aN0EAtc3UbyBtWonExzY7cG1mDVrrXZA_5ZFIpbgRqpGNtLS3Ow=w615-h900-v0

e8423475-633a-4cd1-9ba9-42534073bc31

104 S. TOHN, C III. 

Some are of opinion that the sacrament of baptism was at this 

time instituted by Christ. But it is not probable that Christ 

secretly, in the presence of only Nicodemus, instituted the universal 

sacrament of baptism. Rather, He publicly instituted it at His 

own baptism in the river Jordan. Baptism, however, although it 

had been publicly instituted by Christ, was not binding upon the 

Jews and other men until after Christ's death, at Pentecost. For 

then the promulgation of the Evangelical Law took place, whose 

beginning is baptism. Of this time Christ here speaks. As though 

He said, "The time for the obligation of the Law of the Gospel is 

close at hand. When that shall have come, the ancient Law, and 

circumcision, will cease, and in its place the new Law will succeed, 

and baptism, in which none save those who are born again of water 

and of the Holy Ghost will be able to enter into the kingdom of 

God." Wherefore this precept of Christ has rather reference to the 

time after Pentecost, than the present. 

Moreover, the expression, unless any one shall have been born again, 

intimates that baptism had been already a short time previously 

instituted by Christ. For Christ spake these words to Nicodemus 

shortly after His own baptism. And He would not have told him 

that baptism was necessary for salvation, unless He had already 

instituted it. 

Ver. 6. 

 

That which is born {produced), &c. Christ says this both 

to show the necessity of regeneration by water and the Holy Ghost, 

and at the same time to declare the reason for it, its excellence and 

its profit. His argument then is as follows : Flesh and blood cannot 

possess the kingdom of God, for they are carnal, but the kingdom 

of God is spiritual. Since therefore of carnal generation only flesh 

is born, that is, the animal and carnal man, bound under sin, and 

prone to sin, and so unfitted for the kingdom of God, it follows that 

if such an one would enter into God's spiritual kingdom, he must 

be spiritually born again of water and the Spirit, that he may 

become a spirit, that is, spiritual, and so fitted for the kingdom of 

God. Wherefore you have no cause for wonder, O Nicodemus, at 

what I said, that thou must be born again of water and the Holy

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyS786gsLfY2wXqEaziFPifXYTJDUW4FRNI3GasZFlHrn4R6qbDIX6i3mGLwtLQrSKOq8_31q5DXUYmkoI2Gf-VmQpuBZM0y2X7HeU6sEagrVLru8YuUSQhDS5bnv43pkYpl-I33A=w615-h900-v0

34be33b8-a18e-4f85-9c50-46057bf4f2c4

SPIRITUAL REGENERATION. IOS 

Ghost. For as flesh generates flesh, that is, corporeal and carnal 

substance, so does the Spirit generate spirit, that is, spiritual sub-

stance : for like generates like. The Holy Spirit transmits His own 

substance into that which He begets, so far as it can be trans-

mitted. For the Holy Spirit cannot transmit, or transfuse His own 

substance, or His Deity, into the baptized, for that would be to 

make them really and truly gods, as He Himself is really and truly 

God, which would be impossible. Therefore He transfuses Himself 

into them as far as is possible, by His grace and spiritual gifts, by 

which He makes the baptized like unto Himself, that is, spiritual, 

holy, heavenly, and divine. So SS. Cyril, Chrysostom, and others. 

Let us add that the Holy Spirit gives Himself with His sevenfold 

gifts to the soul which He sanctifies, and adopts for His child ; and 

therefore that His justification is truly spiritual regeneration, by 

which we are born again as sons, and partakers of the Divine 

nature, as I have shown at large in Hosea i. 10, on the words, "Ye 

shall be called the sons of the living God." 

Ver. 7. 

 

Marvel not, &c. As S. Chrysostom says, " We are not dis-

puting concerning flesh, but concerning spirit. Do not think either 

that the Spirit begets flesh, or flesh the Spirit." Therefore it is 

necessary to be born again of the Spirit, if thou seekest to become 

spirit, or spiritual, and a candidate for heaven. 

The Spirit bloweth where it willeth, &c. Christ proceeds to 

unfold to Nicodemus the reason and nature of spiritual regenera-

tion, and to take away his wonder how such a thing could be 

possible. 

You will ask what Spirit is here to be understood. 1. Plainly 

and simply wind is the Spirit. For He compares the Holy Spirit to 

the wind, as is plain from what follows, So is every one that is born 

of the Spirit. The meaning is, As the wind blows where its own 

will, that is, its natural propensity to blow, leads it, and yet you 

can see neither it, nor its determined place, but only its effects, 

and voice, or sound ; so much more neither thou, nor any one else, 

however clever and sharp-sighted, can perceive by natural under-

standing this spiritual regeneration, its end and term. They can

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxc3KrYwuPGlapS4hCIt2yx7MADGoSBAWsCLAwG1TnRnDLk1Yh9e1aktu4txWc8QH6cEoDsKqTxD73ICwQJ1m-HjLve3cp8ZSvwcfD21ExjsmdLL6xzEjCgZQjrJd0k_tGyvHprSA=w615-h900-v0

458bd040-6caf-48ab-aebf-086bcdac7529

106 S. JOHN, C. III. 

only be known by the revelation and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, 

even though the outward symbols of water and the washing in 

baptism may be seen with the body's eyes. Thus S. Chrysostom 

says, If thou knowest not the way of the wind which thou feelest, 

how canst thou search out the operation of the Divine Spirit? 

Christ here plays upon the analogical meaning of the word spirit. 

For first He takes spirit for wind ; then He takes it as the Holy 

Spirit. For wind is the index and symbol of the^Holy Ghost. 

This is clear from the 2d chapter of the Acts, when the Holy Spirit 

came down upon the Apostles as a " rushing mighty wind." 

2. and more sublimely. S. Augustine, Nazianzen, S. Ambrose, 

S. Gregory, whom Toletus cites and follows, understand by spirit 

(the wind), the Holy Ghost. They expound thus, "The Holy 

Ghost bloweth where He willeth, and breathes His own influences 

of faith, repentance, and grace into whomsoever He willeth." And 

thou hearest His voice (Vulg.), by the preaching of Myself and 

My preachers, say S. Augustine, Origen, Bede, and Rupertus. Or 

by voice, efficacy and effects are meant, says Aramon. But thou 

knowest not whence it cometh, or whither it goeth. Thou knowest 

not how He enters into a man, or how He returns, say Alcuin and 

Bede, because His nature is invisible. Again, thou knowest not 

how He leads believers to faith, nor how He draws the faithful to 

hope, charity, and the other virtues. Neither dost thou know how 

He regenerates men to be the sons of God, and leads them to the 

kingdom of God. Lastly, thou knowest not how He changes the 

soul of man, renews and sanctifies it. Thou knowest not to what a 

height of perfection He can lead him who is born of Himself, says 

the Gloss. 

So is every one, &c. The expression so in this sense does not 

denote comparison, but confirmation : meaning, " thus, entirely as 

I have said, is it with every believer who is born again in baptism 

of the Holy Ghost." It is a similar expression to that in Mark, So 

is the kingdom of God (iv. 26). There is an allusion to the ancient 

heroes who, impelled by the Spirit of God, wrought deeds of heroic 

virtue and fortitude. For when Samson did any mighty deed, it is

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxQ8dnRqrWUjeDiokzEBaWV5WN_2NzdPBUKGXPbGNu5FXzZMOT1yQaA4D2oFdy4B_o8PUTBmpCvChi7eSf3xDp8cX6vaZ2bujfndxl1N68lRt5PykLku-UL5bOpzk8kXDulboNQoQ=w615-h900-v0

cb0c0729-7035-44b6-942f-42f40e42fd5a

VARIOUS MEANINGS OF "SPIRIT." IO7 

said, " The Spirit of the Lord rushed upon him " (Vulg.) So also the 

same Spirit is said to have clothed Gideon (Judges vi. 34, Vulg.) 

3. Maldonatus understands the soul by spirit. "What marvel, 

O Nicodemus, if thou understandest not how a man can be 

regenerated by the Holy Ghost, when thou canst not understand how 

he is generated of that natural spirit by which he liveth. For the 

animal spirit bloweth where it listeth, i.e., it animates such bodies 

as it willeth, and makes them alive from the death. It willeth not 

all the things that men will, but only those which are so disposed 

that they can be animated by it." And thou nearest its voice: 

"thou nearest a man speaking, or a lion roaring. Thou also in 

some sense hearest the soul speak, by which means thou under-

standest that a man is alive, 'for the breath in our nostrils is 

smoke, and speech is a spark for moving our heart' (Wisd. ii. 2). 

But thou knowest not whence it cometh, or whither it goeth, 

because thou art ignorant how the soul enters into the body, how 

it goeth out of the body, how it is produced, or what is its destiny. 

If therefore thou art ignorant of the spirit, i.e., the soul, which 

animates what body it willeth, and by it speaks, is born, and dies, 

knowing neither its generation, nor the way in which it comes and 

goes, what wonder that thou canst not understand the way of spiritual 

regeneration, whereby a Christian is born anew of the Spirit in 

baptism ? " This meaning is new, but apposite and connected. It 

draws the argument from the natural generation of the soul to the 

supernatural generation of grace -which is brought about by the 

power of the Holy Ghost. And it shows from the fact of the one 

being unsearchable how much more unsearchable must be the 

other. So in like manner most unsearchable are the things which 

God works in the soul which He illuminates by the rays of His 

light, which He consoles, strengthens, inflows, and as it were 

transforms unto Himself. For as S. Dionysius says, Divine love 

causes ecstasy, so that a man feels not earthly good or ill, but being 

lifted up above them all, he receives and tastes only the things of 

God. 

Ver 9. 

 

Nicodemus answered, &c. " For the animal man " (such

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyypasgXq44VCPBqXcRRXswQ4Fq9b53hnEWEMX5T0z48g5IwtPpLRd_sf4iR6l9oL7SO-gADYyVQhLIDkvW_MhN5__7Mp2wiklwNt_souanW_rBc_cEOtG3CEwNhUgycpKO8gbQBw=w615-h900-v0

c5ea31ba-8b7e-42d8-aedf-9a15b383babb

108 S. JOHN, C. III. 

as Nicodemus at that time was) " perceiveth not the things of the 

Spirit" (i Cor. ii. 14). Just as rustics do not understand scholastic 

questions. 

Ver. 10.—Jesus answered, &c. It was thy duty, O Nicodemus, being 

a Rabbi, who teachest the Law and the Scriptures to the rest of the 

Israelites, to know and teach those very things. For these things 

which I have spoken concerning the regeneration of baptism are 

clearly foretold by Ezekiel (xxxvi. 24) : " I will pour clean water 

upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your iniquities, &c. 

And I will give you a new heart and a new spirit." The same 

things have been foretold by other prophets, and have been clearly 

explained by Me. Wherefore then art thou ignorant of them? 

In truth it is because thou art a Jew, and only comprehendest Judaic 

washings, and corporeal ceremonies : but as yet thou knowest not 

the mysteries of Christ, although they were foretold by the Prophets, 

because they are spiritual. But by degrees, under My teaching, thou 

shalt know them. 

Ver. 11. 

 

Amen, Amen, &c. "The Divine mysteries of God, of 

the Holy Ghost, and His spiritual regeneration, which I declare unto 

thee, I know most truly and most certainly, because I, as God, have 

seen them by Divine knowledge, and as man by the Beatific Vision. 

Wherefore ye ought to believe My testimony ; but the greater part 

of the Jews are unbelieving, and receive not My witness. Indeed, 

thou thyself dost not as yet believe, or thou wouldst not argue with 

Me about them." Christ tacitly exhorts Nicodemus not to scrutinise 

these mysteries by reason in order to understand them, but to view 

them by faith. Christ here speaks of Himself in the plural, We speak 

that we do know , because of the weight of the testimony which is 

wont to be afforded by more than one ; and because He intimates 

that the Father and the Holy Ghost bore witness together with Him, 

for they spake by His mouth. For "in Him dwelt all the fulness 

of the Godhead bodily " (Col. ii. 9). 

Ver. 12. If I have toldyou earthly things, &c. "If thou under-

standest not Divine things by means of the earthly similitudes of 

human generation of flesh and spirit, how wilt thou understand them,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzkFygld1T0UX7rVt32lyf5XUzaEgpPECgS1UXsufc7er8lN1lfaYNk6WD87P5u5zg9wvOYxqxrlSC3qce5Hu4GKAOt67XsaNwAdxwEwbV3RvePM-TwT1dhwoErpS2dS2uKDNQP=w615-h900-v0

65fb8139-957d-4c96-84c1-62d7094fd754

COMMUNICATIO IDIOMATUM. IOQ 

if I were to set them before thee without any figures? For this I might 

do, since I have seen them as they are in themselves, and beheld 

them with the eyes of the mind. But thine eyes would be blinded 

by such light as that, and couldst not look upon it. Wherefore I 

advise thee not to dispute with Me about them, but to believe them 

by simple faith." 

S. Chrysostom explains somewhat differently: thus, "earthly 

things " refer to earthly baptism, or that which is done on earth, or 

that which, in comparison with His own ineffable generation, He 

calls such. It means, If you do not understand My earthly bap-

tism, how will you understand the Divine mysteries of the Holy 

Trinity, the eternal generation of the Word, the procession of the 

Holy Ghost ? Do not therefore curiously inquire into those things, 

or dispute with Me about them, but simply believe Me, who am, as 

it were, a Divine Witness. 

Ver. 13. 

 

And no man hath ascended, &c. And is put instead of 

however. The meaning is, Ye do not believe Me, and yet no other 

person hath ascended into heaven, and there beheld the things 

which I declare, except Myself, who am God and man, and as God 

have come down to the earth that I might teach them to you. 

Christ raises the mind of Nicodemus so that he should not regard 

Him as only a man, but that in this man God lay hidden, who 

filleth heaven and earth, and therefore that he should have full faith 

in Him. 

Ascended: so in the Greek, in the perfect tense. Wherefore this 

passage cannot be understood of Christ's future ascension into 

heaven. Besides, He says expressly that no one else but He hath 

ascended into heaven ; by which He tacitly declares that He has 

been there, and has there beheld God and all the Divine mysteries. 

So Toletus. 

More subtilely Maldonatus. Christ, he says, as man, hath 

ascended into heaven, from the beginning of His Incarnation, not 

by the elevation of the Humanity into heaven, but by the communi-

cation of attributes, because being Incarnate, He was straightway, 

as man, in heaven, by means of that communication, and so is

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwgxECdmd8qnfv1ghGW2-98TqKXLnSIelC9NGwJcE-qOlNZBhtsY-fAON99hLQrHtkpifZvg0zu7_hPK93qejye2MILsvgal2OMH1ebhlfzMaY0kuGTv3pFQRfenLs207l1xUEU=w615-h900-v0

92299461-c20c-4720-ac46-d4b73a6e6665

no S. JOHN, c. III. 

rightly said to have ascended into heaven. For as concerning God 

Incarnate in Christ, it is rightly said that God was born in time, 

was crucified, and died, because the Humanity which God assumed 

was born and died; so in turn, concerning the Man Christ, it is 

truly said this man was from eternity, this man is in heaven, 

because that Divinity which was in the same Person of Christ was 

from eternity, and is in heaven. 

Falsely, however, do the Ubiquitarian heretics maintain that the 

body of Christ is everywhere, because His Divinity is everywhere. 

For it is proper to His Divinity to be everywhere, but to His 

Humanity to be in a certain and determined place, circumscribed 

by limits. 

Save He who came down. From this Valentinus contended that 

Christ brought a body from heaven, and therefore did not receive 

one on earth of the Blessed Virgin. This is a heresy condemned 

by the Church. God therefore, or the Word, is said to have 

descended from heaven, by the figure of speech called catachresis. 

For God does not properly change His place, or descend. But He 

is said to have descended because He assumed human nature, and 

so seemed to men to have come down upon earth. S. Cyril in the 

Council of Ephesus gives the reason. " Because God the Word 

emptied Himself and was called the Son of Man, remaining still 

what He was, that is, God, it is as if He, reckoned with His own 

flesh, were said to have come down from heaven." 

The Son of Man, &c. He explains what He has said. Christ hath 

ascended into heaven, who as God was from eternity in heaven, 

for He is always in heaven, as its Maker and Ruler. The Son of 

Man therefore, that is, the Man Christ, is said to be in heaven 

by the communication of attributes, because His Divinity was in 

heaven, as I have said. 

Vers. 14 and 15. 

 

And as Moses, &c. Christ proceeds to instruct 

Nicodemus; (for as in the verses preceding He has taught Him that He is God, so now He teaches him that He has been made man), that being crucified for man's redemption He will merit that 

every one who believeth in Him, and trusts for salvation to the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwhHppiCAP0flnf1CFJm6PuMahQAJNeDiw1rqfYUDAfZCA2JfhaG7SqQr7CDKt-dN6DKA2bkveV8egdTb4pGYT9Vcbkq9hsLqQU--ewxgVPGl1SwhLkBl_WeLtrkxlf4Wyw93w5yg=w615-h900-v0

7a4208b0-1b5e-43eb-9ada-46197cbbea0b

THE BRAZEN SERPENT. Ill 

merit of His death, shall obtain it. For thus Christ is wont, when 

speaking concerning Himself, to unite things human to things Divine, 

and things lowly to things glorious. As though He said, " Whosoever 

is bitten by the serpents of sins, let him look to Christ, and he shall 

have healing by the remission of sins," as Pope Adrian I. says in 

his first epistle to Charles the Great. The same proves that the 

use of images is lawful from this serpent. He adds, "The figure 

afforded temporal life ; the thing itself, of which it was the figure, 

life eternal." 

Christ refers to the history of the brazen serpent in the wilderness, 

which is given in the 21st chapter of Numbers. Upon this history S. 

Augustine comments as follows {depeccat. merit., lib. 1, c. 32). "The 

serpent lifted up is the death of Christ. By the serpent came death, 

for he persuaded man to sin. Now the Lord took upon His flesh, 

not the poison of the serpent, which is sin, but death, that there 

might be in the likeness of flesh the penalty of sin without its fault, 

that thus both the penalty and the fault might be done away." And 

Theophylact says, "In that brazen serpent was the appearance 

indeed of the noxious creature, but not its poison : so in Christ was 

the likeness of sinful flesh, but no sin." 

Most fully does S. Chrysostom draw out the analogies between 

the brazen serpent and Christ. He says, "Lest any one should say, 

'How are those who believe in the Crucified One able to be saved, 

when he did not deliver Himself from death ? '" He brings forward 

the ancient history. For if the Jews by looking at the image of a 

brazen serpent were freed from death, how much greater benefit 

will they enjoy who look to the Crucified Redeemer? For by the 

one the Jews escaped temporal death : by the other believers escape 

everlasting death. There the suspended serpent healed the wounds which the serpents had made : here Jesus, nailed to the cross, healed 

the wounds inflicted by the incorporeal serpent (the devil). There 

those who looked with their bodily eyes obtained the healing of the 

body 

: 

here those who look with their spiritual eyes obtain the re-

mission of all their sins. There a serpent bit, and a serpent healed : 

here death destroyed, and death hath saved. In the one case the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxsbEA0zluZE43oYuW2B_lLzzK5XfXODXF6GXWljURGr5mwJ41a9s_hH6gYkYgu3934ra9lMCEd5B-fNjZlq168-jrf-mObkuktSiserD9U04LntJ3hbim2xQ__1Ei_cs3KszKxbg=w615-h900-v0

c718bbbf-a8b1-41ae-9269-c3784e3ecc2d

112 S. JOHN, C. III. 

serpent which destroyed was full of poison, and delivered no one 

from poison. And in the other case the death which destroyeth 

had sin, as the serpent had poison : but the Lord's death was free 

from all sin, just as the brazen serpent had no poison. You see 

how the figure answers to the reality. 

Lifted up: i.e., set up upon a lofty pole. The Hebrew in Numbers 

xxi. 9, adds al nes, i.e., upon a standard. This may have been a 

long spear with an ensign raised like a standard. For this was a 

type and figure of the standard of the cross of Christ, to which He 

Himself calls His faithful ones, like soldiers. This spear with the 

brazen serpent suspended from it Moses reared up upon the taber-

nacle, which was in the midst of the camp in the wilderness, and 

served the Hebrews in the room of a temple. So Justin, towards 

the end of his " Second Apology." By this was signified that the 

cross of Christ should be fixed in His temples, and adored by all 

the faithful as the standard and trophy of the Christian faith and 

religion. 

S. Chrysostom asks, Why did He not here say suspended rather than 

lifted up, or exalted7 And he replies, "That it might neither give 

a sense of shame to His hearer, nor be different from the type." 

From all that has been said it will appear how foolish is Calvin's 

interpretation, that this lifting up of Christ is not His crucifixion, 

but the preaching of His Gospel. 

That every one who believeth : and obeys His laws, or who be-

lieves in Him, not with a bare and unformed faith, but a faith formed 

by love. Hath eternal life, by grace, repentance, and good works, 

which Christ from the cross inspires for this end, that a man may 

deserve and attain to life, happiness, and eternal glory. 

Ver. 1 6. 

 

For God so loved, &c. This is said by way of anticipa-

tion, lest Nicodemus should object, " If thou art the Son of God, how 

will God suffer Thee to be suspended and exalted upon the cross ? 

" 

Christ meets this by implying that God will permit it in order to 

show forth His burning love to men, which was typified by the 

serpent of brass, which is called in Hebrew saraph, which means 

fiery, and setting on fire. So S. Chrysostom and Theophylact.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzIZ8VySIp7XJZUO09-h5MZHdxdWQbZSJu6M_XzftbbWKp5FEc4SpnPkKi3UY8fGD7PjOtPY6d1G12rfh_bAGxmkl6IPUB-cvh4Kiqe2kNP_Ibg7VB25TBnFrzIuPHZvlxHwFjWPg=w615-h900-v0

e82c4f6d-5c8a-4139-9a46-0e847bc50be5

THE INFINITE LOVE OF GOD. 1 13 

Observe that every word of Christ in this sentence has a great and 

special emphasis, in order to magnify to the utmost the love of God. 

For (i.) He says, So, with such vehemence, such excess of love. 

2. Not a king, or an angel, loved, but God. 3. Loved, i.e., first, and as 

it were gratuitously ; without merit, yea, even without desire on our 

part. 4. The world, His enemy, and under the sentence of damna-

tion. 5. Gave not another man, not an angel, not another world, 

but His Son ; and that not an adopted Son, but His own Son and 

again not one Son of many, but His only Son, His Only Begotten Son. 

6. He did not sell, or lend, but gave freely ; and not to a kingdom 

and triumphs, but to death and the cross. 7. Christ did not do it 

for Himself, to gain any advantage for Himself, but that He, the 

Creator, might give life to us His creatures by His own death, that 

by His humility He might exalt us, that by His emptying Himself 

He might heap upon us eternal glory, and an infinite weight of 

wealth and goodness. This is the love of God towards man, which 

the Apostle celebrates (Titus iii. 5). 

You may say, it would have been greater love if God the Father 

had given Himself for us, and taken our flesh, than that He sent 

His Son. For he gives more who gives himself than he who sends 

another. 

But I reply that this is true of those who are of a different essence, 

but not of God : for the Father and the Son have the same Divine 

Essence, and are consubstantial. Wherefore the Father, in giving us 

His Son, with Him gave us His own Essence, than which nothing 

greater can exist, or be given. This gift of the Father was therefore 

the greatest possible, and infinite. So S. Cyril on this passage. 

You may further urge, God gave not His own Person, but 

His Essence only -. and that He would have given more if He had given His Person also. I answer by denying the conclusion. 

1. Because Person in God is in reality the same as Essence ; for it 

adds nothing to His Essence except relatively, and the idea of dis-

tinction from the other Persons : also because the Person of the Son 

is as worthy as the Person of the Father. For all the three Divine 

Persons are co-equal in all things, as the Athanasian Creed saith 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy80hUl4lcbQcXPsE39goay7Zi0IuLYTdx1Uz4I6lmXE7aRiiksk7US2AhZx1yTECSb9AHs9GuNtp8XhlE_sP2RUwcZ-ZfCfZWtT3m0y2yP4XFlp4pmY22c1sCRuaiWVc9EfrUK3w=w615-h900-v0

dfa1d4f1-d363-4291-9550-c7448db3e5d0

II4 S. JOHN, C III. 

Besides, the Father in giving the Person of His Son, gave us also 

His own Person, as well as the Person of the Holy Ghost. Because 

the Father is in the Son, and both are in the Holy Ghost. And 

again the Son is in the Father, and the Holy Ghost in the Father 

and the Son, of which I will speak more fully on chapter xiv. 10. 

Moreover S. Thomas (3 part, qu. 3) gives several reasons why 

God the Father gave not proximately His own Person, but the 

Person of His Son ; or why the Son alone took upon Him our flesh. 

Among which the primary is, because the Father willed to adopt 

us and our nature, and to make us His sons, and so heirs. For He 

made His Son to be our brother, that by Him we might become 

sons of God, and so heirs, as Christ here intimates. 

Ver. 17. 

 

For God sent not, &c. He confirms and intensifies the 

assertion of the infinite love of God to men, as proved by Christ's 

being crucified. For God might justly have sent His Son into the 

world to destroy it for its great wickedness. For this was what 

His justice demanded, but the infinite love of God overcame justice 

in that it bestowed the highest blessing upon the world, which 

deserved the utmost extremity of punishment, in giving it salvation 

through Him. 

Observe : the expression judge the world, as it is in the Vulgate, 

means to condemn, and destroy it in hell. It is opposed to the 

word saved. Hence S. Augustine observes that this was the end ot 

Christ's Incarnation, that all men might be saved, and that He 

earnestly desired and willed this. Wherefore it is of themselves, 

through their own fault, and not Christ's, that many of them will be 

damned. 

He that believeth . is not judged, shall not be condemned, but 

saved. But he that believeth not is judged, i.e., is condemned already. 

For such an one manifestly condemns himself by his unbelief; for 

by it he cuts himself off from the very pathway and beginning oi 

salvation, i.e., faith ; because he hath not believed in the name, &c, 

Greek, e/'s wo/ao,, which means the same thing as believing on the 

Son of God Himself. For name is here put by metonymy for the 

thing named. "He shows," says S. Cyril, "how dreadful a crime

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzTrB3p_ppqiEG6ela7lHvJwv5sa_-gHsM5aWwgAOA1uvgrPXqFDGoMfJO1x-7pbwXx87cbC6Y0pRfkaxuzFcjt6luAazWnmxDrzrtYdifKD2ZhewiiIwcNSxmkRIPBivERM-BuFQ=w615-h900-v0

8687ef1a-7a97-4ee4-8d99-e7b03f1596c0

MEANING OF JUDGMENT. 115 

unbelief is, because He is the Only Begotten Son of God. For by how 

much greater is the excellence of that which is despised, by so much 

will he who despises be liable to severer punishment. Especially, 

because such persons make God a liar, because they believe not 

the witness which God hath testified of His Son" (1 John v. 10). 

Ver. 19. 

 

This is thejudgment, &c. (Vulg.) Judgment, i.e., cause of 

judgment, or condemnation. This is the cause why those are already 

condemned who believe not on Me, because they have preferred 

darkness, and ignorance of God, and of what they ought to do, and 

their own pleasures and lusts and sins upon the earth, rather than 

light, that is, Christ, who hath brought the knowledge of God and 

salvation into the world. For light and darkness are the symbols 

of these things. Wherefore Bede says, He calls Himself/^ Light 

 

sins He calls darkness. Moreover, light came into the world to 

arouse men, says the Gloss : to admonish them to know their 

evils, says S. Chrysostom. " For they themselves would not admit 

the light of truth and holiness, which He preached by His word 

and example." In like manner many at the present day become 

heretics that they may follow their carnal will, which heresy per-

mits, but the faith forbids. Therefore to convert a heretic make 

use of this method : first persuade him to lead an honest life, 

moral, chaste, and holy. Thus will you the more easily bring him 

to the true faith. 

2. Judgment might be taken thus, as signifying the condemnation 

and rejection of unbelievers, or the judgment wherewith they con-

demn themselves, in that they prefer darkness to light, that is, 

cupidity to sanctity, ignorance to knowledge, the devil to God. 

Wherefore Christ as it were says to such, " It is not I who judge 

thee, but thine own conscience which judges and condemns thee." 

Ver. 20. 

 

For every one that doeth evil, Greek, <£aDXa, depraved 

and perverse things, &c. "Every one who does wickedly," says S. 

Cyril, "refuses the illumination of the light, not because he is 

ashamed of his wickedness, and repents, for if he did he would be 

saved, but because he prefers to be in ignorance of the better way, 

lest in his daily sins he should feel the stings of conscience."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzTPldxAJ79ODOu9jBrm6tZhCoPdvGhmRRup0m4OvFrV4niq319iqNgT9mkEzY8PsM65wg5eqXCZ2_cxSY_rJL-LbL-J6s-JuxkRme5gvsKKTbmc1TZFX8SDUT5mEG0gfJ2z5QGGw=w615-h900-v0

8ae8b9ca-7495-4cc8-b69d-6a286ae0ba84

Il6 S. JOHN, C. III. 

"For," as S. Chrysostom observes, "it marks those who still per-

severe in their wickedness, and are zealous to do evil to their last 

breath ; who persevere in evil deeds, and always wallow in the mire 

of vice." 

Ver. 2 1 . —But he that doeth in God, i.e. , 

accordin g to God's will 

and law, and by His guidance, light, and help. The truth, i.e., 

practically by doing what is right and just, and pleasing to God. 

For as there is truth of the heart and mouth, so is there of deed, 

by which it comes to pass that an honest and holy work corresponds 

to the practical rule of reason and prudence, or virtue, and the will 

of God. Thus (viii. 43), it is said of Lucifer, he abode not in the 

truth, i.e., in equity, justice, and sanctity. So also the Apostle 

exhorts us to do the truth, i.e., what is truly good, and holy, and 

pleasing to God. 

The meaning is, he who does, i.e., who by the light and grace of 

God proposes and determines to do the truth, i.e., what is truly good 

and holy, cotneth to the light, i.e., embraces My doctrine, and the 

Christian faith, that his works may be manifest that they are done in 

God, that they please God because they are done by His leading 

and guidance. And if they be otherwise, He will correct them, 

and amend them in accordance with the will of God. " He shows," 

says S. Chrysostom, "that none of those who are in error will 

submit to the truth, unless a man will first persuade himself to lead 

a correct life ; and that no one will persist in unbelief unless he be 

wholly given up to wickedness." 

Thus far are the words of Christ to Nicodemus. 

Ver. 22. 

 

After this, &c. This means that Jesus went from Jeru-

salem, a citizen of which Nicodemus appears to have been, to some 

other part of the land of Judea, because He would avoid the sects 

and enmities of the chief men of Jerusalem. So S. Chrysostom and 

others. As the former saith, " He was accustomed to come into 

the city at the solemn feasts, that He might publicly make known 

the doctrine of God : from thence He often retired to the river 

Jordan." 

Baptized, not so much by Himself as by His disciples, as is said

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwHTCgaUT4PZ6dDIS6Cf-ElljPp_lbSaUAaLooBbGiao40j2uq4mSlDO2MSbmnto8sYGQY7fY3bMVWUo3cnLQkm0VLkFps1acYfIv1aL8C6t5HDr18vLwuNvB0fX4XRgtb00PXTfA=w615-h900-v0

de1edbc3-daa4-488c-8d19-ce2c800072e3

CHRIST BAPTIZES. 117 

in iv. 2. Yet He first Himself baptized there. He baptized by 

others for several reasons— 1. To show that His baptism was 

different from that of John. For the latter was conferred by John 

alone ; but Christ's baptism was conferred by others also, His 

disciples, Christ in them and by them working mightily. 2. To 

show that the authority, power, and continuance of His baptism 

were to extend through all succeeding ages. So SS. Augustine 

and Cyril. 3. Because He Himself was occupied in the greater 

works of teaching, healing the sick, and working miracles. More-

over, when the disciples of Christ baptized, they were not yet 

apostles. For they were made apostles after John's imprisonment. 

But those things happened before it, as is evident from verse 24. 

These disciples therefore were not yet apostles, nor even priests, for 

they were afterwards created priests by Christ at His Last Supper. 

Wherefore it is an error to say, as S. Chrysostom and Tertullian 

do (de. Bapt., c. 2), that Christ did not baptize, because before His 

death baptism had not the power of remitting sins, and confer-

ring the Holy Ghost ; therefore that the disciples of Christ thus 

baptized with John's baptism, not Christ's. S. Chrysostom says, 

"Both baptisms, viz., that of John and that of the disciples of 

Christ, were devoid of the Spirit. They both had the same object 

in view, which was to gain disciples to Christ." That there was 

no excellence in either the baptism of the one or the other, he 

argues from the words in the 7th chapter, The Spirit was not yet 

given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. But I will show that this 

is not the meaning in the proper place. 

Let us add S. Leo (Epist. 4, ad Episc. Sid/., c. 2). "Properly, in 

the death of the Crucified, and in His resurrection from the dead, 

the virtue of baptism makes a new creature out of the old, that 

both the death and the life of Christ should be wrought in them 

that are born again, as the blessed Apostle Paul says, ' Know ye 

not that as many of us as are baptized into Christ, have been 

baptized into his death ? 

' 

 

But S. Paul's meaning is different, as I have said on the passage, 

and so, as I think, is S. Leo's. For before His death Christ

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzaGppWqTB7hIOdKtMZKTU_UmnSxRFOsNXzBvfbkeQqop88WeVyeXKb7roLDDZzQQTe0KlBbxkHFnGzsXOxPEN3pK4AnO-Q4ahY_e_sx-qvbMIOuTW38P4UF9c0Or0Z_taOrXOF=w615-h900-v0

04b05609-c440-4ce0-863f-aa99327d2ea1

Il8 S. JOHN, c. III. 

remitted sins to the paralytic, and also to Mary Magdalene, and 

filled her with the spirit of charity : and that by His word only, with-

out a sacrament. For this forgiveness derived its justifying power 

from the merits of Christ both present and to come : and especially 

from His death, which He had already undertaken to suffer, and 

had offered Himself to God the Father to be a victim for the 

salvation of men. Wherefore, as the Eucharist instituted before the 

death of Christ sanctified the apostles, so also did baptism. Thus 

at length S. Augustine in this passage (Tract. 15). 

In like manner it is not very probable what D. Soto thinks, 

that the disciples here used as the form in baptism, / baptize thee 

in the name ofJesus Christ, whereas after His resurrection they said, 

J baptize thee in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy 

Ghost. This is improbable, because in so doing Christ would have 

changed the form of baptism, and in so doing He would have insti-

tuted two baptisms. Besides, it is not probable that Christ baptized 

in His own name when He Himself baptized His apostles. 

Moreover, Euthymius says that the belief of the most ancient 

Fathers was, that Christ Himself baptized the Blessed Virgin and S. 

Peter. Evodius, S. Peter's successor in the see of Antioch, says in 

his treatise called Lumen, or The Light, that Christ with His own 

hands baptized Andrew, John, and James, and that they baptized 

the rest of the apostles. 

Ver. 23.—NowJohn, &c. sEnnon, or Ennon, was a town on the 

banks of the Jordan, eight miles from Bethshan, which was afterwards, 

from its occupation by the Scythians, called Scythopolis. ^Ennon is 

derived from the Hebrew ain, or an, a well or fountain, because, 

as it is said, there was much water there. 

Near to Salim. There were two Salims, or Salems ; one which 

was afterwards called Jerusalem, the other near Scythopolis, which 

was called, in S. Jerome's time, Salumius, as he tells us in his Loci's 

Hebraicis. Salem means in Hebrew, health, peace, perfection. For 

these penitents received from John, being transmitted to Christ, 

who baptized not far from John. There was much water there. 

From this we may gather that John baptized so as not only to lave

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxTKT9WQxNhNhtFbKZqIdlModkSV5GQofsQwiM6R8ct6JWqfq_DzQqQvqPpZtgb0ktwrHWBUZEYjxcwqt6CYkY9QmZ9iZ4sFul1SDL51t7rKWyz4nrrPn7bVCg13dybo37-V0l3vA=w615-h900-v0

3960406b-28d9-4957-9b71-3b06962dcd1c

QUESTION OF JOHNS BAPTISM. IIQ 

the head, for which only a moderate quantity of water was needed, 

but the whole body. 

Ver. 24. 

 

ForJohn had notyet been sent (Vulg. missus, Greek cast) 

intoprison. This implies, says S. Chrysostom, that John baptized up 

to the time of his being cast into prison. For until his death he per-

severed in the office for which God hath sent him, namely, that 

by baptizing and preaching he might prepare the way for Christ. 

And when he had done this superabundantly, God allowed him to 

be cast into prison, that he might give way to Christ, and send all 

his disciples to Christ, as in fact he did. 

The Evangelist adds this verse to show that he was supplying the 

history of all the preceding events, and adding them to the narra-

tives of the other Evangelists, who began from the imprisonment 

of John. 

Now there arose, &c. The Greek for now is o5», therefore. 

Because indeed John baptized with Jesus, since John preceded, 

there arose a question, that is, a strife and controversy, from John's 

disciples. This they raised out of zeal for the honour and authority 

of their master John, lest he, through the baptism given by Jesus, 

should be little thought of. For many were flocking to Jesus, 

John himself sending them, preferring Jesus to himself. 

With the Jews, i.e., those following Jesus. The Complutensian 

Version has the word in the singular, ftiru loudaiov, with a Jew. 

The Syriac has, between a disciple of John and a Jew, a reading 

which is followed and commented on by S. Chrysostom, Nonnus, 

Theophylact, and Euthymius. But the Latins, and of the Greeks 

S. Cyril, read with the Jews, in the plural. It may be that one 

raised the strife, and that, as usual, many took part in it. About 

purifying, i.e., about the baptism of John and Jesus, whether of 

the twain were the better, and had greater purifying and sanctify-

ing efficacy. "For the Jew," says Theophylact, "preferred the 

baptism of the disciples of Christ, but the disciples of John the 

baptism of their master," in that he had first baptized many, and 

even Jesus Himself, as it were a disciple. But the disciples of 

Jesus replied that He did many miracles, but that John did none.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyg0TT43m3VUEOFAgzrunVWLoO_AxZxZl0UDy-jy2OdrqpftweujrWvxdryrN4Dec70tmWVgVjGvWTMk8XcfIjWT4MjP8oXaUVFJV_9zYAeCJFD014EP7VRHYVMQp0ZDsQVMaKKvg=w615-h900-v0

1055cebc-39e6-4bcd-a03d-304d31857235

120 S. JOHN, C III. 

They added that John himself preferred Jesus to himself, and said 

that He was the Christ. So S. Augustine and others. 

Ver. 26. 

 

And they came, &c. Who was wiih thee beyondJordan: 

viz., Jesus, who came to thee to be baptized. He now ungratefully 

makes Himself equal to thee, and usurps thine office of baptizing. 

You ought therefore to restrain Him ; otherwise all will flock from 

thee to Him, to thy shame as well as ours. Thus Euthymius, "He exercises thine own office against thee, and seizes on thy renown." 

Wishing further to exasperate John, they added, All men leave thee, 

and go to Him. 

Ver. 27. -John answered, &c. He openly repressed the ambition 

and quarrelsomeness of His disciples. Yea, he declares openly that 

the right is with Christ. He prefers Him to himself, and gives fresh 

and ample testimony that He is the Messias. " I cannot without 

the greatest presumption, pride, and ingratitude take a higher rank, 

or authority, than God has given me. And I will not do so. What 

then do you wish ? That I should invade the office of Messiah, 

and take it from Jesus ? God forbid. For if I attempted to do so, 

God would justly deprive me of my own office and dignity. You 

know that common Syrian proverb of ours, 27ie camel demanding 

horns lost his ears. Far be it from me therefore that I should 

prefer myself to Jesus, or arrogate the name and dignity of Messias. 

For God has given this to Jesus, not to me. God has given me 

enough, and more than enough, in making me His forerunner. 

Contented with that I will live and die, and yield gladly all other 

things to Jesus my Lord." So S. Augustine, Bede, and others. 

Ver. 28.— Ye yourselves bear me witness, &c. That I said I went 

before Him, that as His forerunner, minister, and herald, I should 

precede His advent. " You know that I have always professed that I 

am not the Christ, but His forerunner. Why then do you urge me to revoke what I have said, and prefer myself to Jesus, and steal 

away from Him the name of Christ ? Truly this would be intoler-

able pride, inconsistency, and blasphemy. Suffer me then to live 

contented with my office, and with me prepare His way, and follow 

and serve Him the Messias, both your and my Lord and God."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyFv3o0VsXNrHq6xipFyc0-QWxzJClc3IS8ljq6mPjlqhJYETRqQYWzwI7hwxcDtKyu9Klr9r3wLjugAennXnb_Rc_JaYL7q92iwMuyUkKz8X0EzJYji9tUbVnKs1jUqVXvTCQtGg=w615-h900-v0

17c59c55-e959-44ed-b562-4dff8d23f1d6

THE PARANYMPH. 121 

Ver. 29. 

 

He that hath the bride, &c. " Jesus Christ by His Incar-

nation hath betrothed unto Himself the Church, which is the whole 

company of believing people ; and God hath given her to Him as 

a bride to a bridegroom. Jesus therefore is the true husband of 

the Church, a husband which must be received, and loved, and 

worshipped in the highest degree by all who believe. What wonder 

then if all the people leave me and flock to Him ? For I am not 

the bridegroom, but Christ's, the Bridegroom's, friend. Wherefore 

I greatly rejoice that I should be counted worthy of so great a 

ministry, that I should be the paranymph of the Bridegroom, and 

that I should convey the bride, that is, the faithful, to Him, that 

all may acknowledge, love, and reverence Him as the Messias, and 

look for all grace and glory from Him, as the Head and Prince of 

the whole Church." 

This is an allusion to paranymphs, who were the most intimate 

and familar friends of the bridegroom, insomuch that, all others 

being excluded, they were admitted to the bridegroom's nuptial 

chamber. 

Observe that John in the first chapter calls himself the servant of 

Jesus, and declares that he was not worthy to unloose His sandals. 

But here he calls himself His friend. For this is the condescension 

of Jesus, our God, that He calls, and adopts His faithful servants 

to be His friends, yea, and His sons. John here calls himself a 

friend rather than a servant, because the servants of heroes often 

envy their felicity, but their friends never,—but rather promote it, 

and rejoice and exult in it. The meaning is, "I, John, for this 

reason do not grieve, nor envy Jesus, that all the people flock to 

Him, because I am His intimate friend, and love Him above all 

things. It has ever been my great object to draw the people from 

myself to Him, as a bride to her bridegroom." So S. Chrysostom. 

Let all true teachers, pastors, and preachers do the same, and not 

seek to draw, or attract, the faithful to themselves, but to Christ. 

He who standeth, &c. " I, John, stand at Christ the Bridegrooms 

side as His attendant, and in silence hear his voice, as He lovingly 

converses with His bride. I do not covet the bride for myself,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxkE4_-8MlZcWJYIgUX92jJwU1scRidwo5PBM9ylTKd7lcK8eMP9A4N4xonOv63MHJoD-hds3QCdJUZ3UYA_yK5paNQc8eAuY4XZgEe6RRerHKyzNJDHNoc1Xh5CbZVvA-8ojF9gg=w615-h900-v0

8cca89f4-215e-4375-a782-af400d68d17c

122 S. JOHN, C. III. 

but I rejoice unspeakably that I am counted worthy to hear His 

voice." John here intimates that he was about to be put to silence 

 

that having fulfilled his office, he must cease from preaching and 

baptizing, and give place to Christ, that his own course being, as it 

were, finished, he must hand on the lamp to Him, which happened 

shortly afterwards, when Herod cast him into prison. 

This my joy, &c. " I began to rejoice when I knew by the reve-

lation of God that the advent of Christ was at hand. I rejoiced 

still more when I saw and heard Him present. But when I per-

ceived all the people flocking to Him, then my joy was fulfilled and 

perfected. For by His grace alone I have preached and baptized, 

and passed my whole life." 

Ver. 30. 

 

He must increase, viz., by the flocking of the people to 

Him, by the abundance and glory of His miracles, in adoration and 

worship, that the whole world may love and worship Him as Christ. 

So S. Cyril, to whom listen. " So long as the profundity of the sethei 

is obscured by the shades of night, every one speaks with the 

greatest admiration of the morning star, as it shines with the full 

glory of its golden splendour. But when the sun is seen to hasten 

to his rising, and when his light somewhat illumines this our earth, 

the day star yields gradually to the greater luminary, and the words 

of John might not improperly be applied, He must increase, but 1 

must decrease." Likewise S. Chrysostom says, " Christ increases in 

that He by degrees manifests Himself by signs and miracles : not 

because He makes increase in virtue,—God forbid ; for this would 

be the madness of Nestorius." 

But I must decrease : not in virtue, wisdom, or merit. For in these 

John constantly increased until he received the crown of martyrdom, 

but as regarded the honour which he received in the people flock-

ing to him. "I have fulfilled my office, now I will cease," as 

S. Chrysostom says of him. As a symbol of this, John was born 

shortly after the summer solstice, when the days begin to decrease 

 

but Christ was born shortly after the winter solstice, when the days 

being at the shortest, begin to increase, as S. Chrysostom remarks, 

(Horn, de JSlativ.), and others.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzJQR5SD4jTTVmXqBY1x1ASnaCkkjCUO5rphOUbKKZckTOGlVUgiZrK9XnEUfDNcbuK_EupZuaszx_i5c5Y3tsO3m0aXBMYiNLpr6IyTD4coWUzOQTaY8ueEmNUk98EVZxCQGuEdw=w615-h900-v0

c72ccf02-a623-44c2-803c-db69852c6f0f

JOHN AND CHRIST COMPARED. t2j 

He who isfrom above, &c. He gives the reason why Jesus must 

increase; because He was from above, from heaven, out of the bosom 

of the Father, as the Only Begotten Son of God. Wherefore He is 

above all, not only me, John, but far above all angels and creatures 

whatsoever, forasmuch as He is the Creator and the Lord of all, 

and so by all to be worshipped and adored. 

Ver. 32. 

 

He that is of the earth, &c. John prefers Christ to him-

self, as what is heavenly to what is earthly. As much therefore as 

heaven is higher than the earth, so greatly is Christ superior to 

John, according to the words, "The first man is of the earth, 

earthy; the second man is of the heaven, heavenly" (1 Cor. xv. 47, 

Vulg.) 

The meaning is, " He that is born of the earth, as I John am 

formed from it, as Adam was, he is earthy, and of the earth he 

speaketh, i,e., of earthly things. Now this was true of John (1.) if 

you have regard to his bare nature, as apart from the grace and 

calling of God. For apart from that, John was only earthy, and 

savoured of the earth. " For if thou hast heard anything Divine 

from John, it is of Him who gave him the light, not of him who 

only received the light," as S. Augustine says. 

2. It is true if John be compared with Christ, whose origin, 

nature, and spirit are far loftier than those of John, for they are 

plainly heavenly and Divine, and consequently altogether efficacious 

for influencing the minds of men as He willed. And this Christ 

did by His grace, which He breathed inwardly into the souls of those 

who heard Him. 

And what He (i.e., Christ) hath seen, &c. This is by catachresis, 

for in things Divine, to see and hear mean the same as to know. 

But to see signifies the evidence of the things that are known : to 

hear, their source, because indeed He had received all these things, 

as knowledge, and the fulness of wisdom, together with the Divine 

Essence, from the Father. 

No one receiveth : i.e., hyperbolically, forfew receive. For although 

many flocked to Jesus, yet in comparison with those who stayed 

at home, and neglected the preaching of Jesus, they were but few.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxMEY4LqHD1LvM7tHWD4pdEoNImTwp6eyJWqQf6FyTl3So8JbczSzbeRusGJKrdTBSkEK7dOUDxwWDNNNSZJjeh3s2qYFsaMwEr25I47eiKp-1MAunR_kM4qvONjh9T_U9bRF2nnA=w615-h900-v0

a49eb4f5-ecf8-4a76-9ab9-af47bb2e8e96

124 s - JOHN, C. Ill, 

And even amongst those few, some believed, and some believed 

not, such as the scribes and Pharisees. John refers to his own 

disciples, say S. Chrysostom and Euthymius because few of the 

Jews came to him, and fewer still believed. 

Ver. 35. 

 

He that hath received, or that receiveth His testimony 

(by believing), hath signed (Vulg.), &c. For the Vulgate signavit 

the Greek has iatftgdyietv, or hath marked, and signed with a seal. 

He who receives Christ's testimony, and believes in Him, testifies by 

so doing, and as it were attaches a seal to his profession of faith, 

that God the Father is true, who by His Son, as by His own mouth, 

speaks things most true and Divine. For the Son heard them, and 

received them from the Father. Or, as S. Cyril says, such an one 

testifies that God the Son is true, who declares these very things. 

He who believes in God and in His Son gives great honour to God, 

because by his belief he professes that God is true, yea, primal and 

infallible Truth. On the contrary, he that believeth not greatly 

dishonours God, because in reality he makes Him out false, which 

is the highest possible contempt and blasphemy of God. S. John 

says in his Epistle (i John v. 10, n), "He that believeth on the 

Son of God hath the witness in himself : he that believeth not God, 

hath made Him a liar ; because he believeth not the record that God 

gave of His Son. And this is the record, that God hath given to us 

eternal life, and this life is in His Son." Alcuin explains somewhat 

differently. He hath sealed, i.e., he hath put a sign, as it were some-

thing peculiar and especial, in his heart, that this is the true God, 

who hath been sent for the salvation of the human race. 

Moreover, God is said to sign and seal His words and His oracles 

when He confirms them by miracles ; but man is said to sign and 

seal these same words of God when he believes them to be true. 

Faith therefore is the seal by which we attest the words of God. 

Ver. 34. For whom God hath sent, &c. He proves what he has 

said, that he who believes in Jesus Christ signs and testifies by the 

seal of his faith that God is true, because Jesus whom God sent 

from heaven to earth, that incarnate in our flesh He might teach and 

save men—Jesus, I say, speaks not His own words but the words

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyPV3gNfEyTuutrEbWAhIe0dCCr74s5eUPifmRAPlL8FpsZAGOY9QbjfFTZv1AML89Nbvwe2Cu1z5p9f00gOoxOPN5cqAUG273c9-4D8m7nTczZwW5_qVHKF3Tgp_EYxvN-3gvCvA=w615-h900-v0

1327577c-cc75-4510-a8fd-5c852e183b2e

HOW CHRIST HATH THE SPIRIT. 1 25 

of God who sent Him. The words of Jesus are the words of God 

the Father, for He gave them to Him. Wherefore he who believes 

in Jesus, the same believes in God the Father. For God sent 

Jesus, and they are the words of God which Jesus speaks. So 

Euthymius. 

Giveth not the Spirit, i.e., the gifts of the Spirit. He saith giveth, not 

hath given, because what God once for all hath given to Christ, the 

same He ever giveth by conservation and continual influx. For 

conservation means nothing else but the continuation of a thing 

created, and as it were continuous creation. The meaning is, Jesus 

being sent by God declares and preaches the words of God, and 

all the Divine mysteries, because God communicates these to Him 

without measure, and as it were in an infinite degree. God is not 

so poor, or parsimonious, that He has a certain measure of the 

Spirit, than which He cannot give a greater. For there are in God 

infinite riches of the Spirit, which He gives and communicates 

to Jesus, who is His own Son. " Wherefore although you, O my 

disciples, behold in me John, your master, great power and efficacy 

of the Divine Spirit in preaching, know ye that in Jesus there is far 

greater, yea, that in Him is the whole fulness of the Spirit; in Jesus, 

I say, both as God and man." For in that He is God, "He possesseth the Spirit substantialiter," says S. Cyril. In that He is 

man, " in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily " 

(Col. ii. 9). And "in Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom 

and knowledge " (Col. ii. 3). As S. Augustine says, " To men He giveth by measure ; to the Only Begotten Son He giveth not by 

measure." 

You will say, Does then Christ as man receive the Spirit and 

grace in an absolutely infinite manner? I answer, No, for this 

would be impossible ; nor would the created and finite soul of 

Christ be capable of it. The Spirit therefore is said to be given 

without measure unto Him, because God most abundantly com-

municated unto Him all His graces and all His gifts, as being 

the Head of the Church. And those gifts He imparts to faithful 

men, that is, His members, in a certain measure, according to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyTrfy-1zD0JwYd5imDwlH3Bk-KVbDtkI0MB312wJpnDSFjo9OtuKVjBe96EWaTk-BpCJBGcwbfmFS_zOSoD03fMmeFf9Kf7lT3mnw6wZaY6Gvbrst8-z7JT-Lm6FA5OqlnEXM97w=w615-h900-v0

a64a2c14-1f9a-4775-bcdc-a0512472a5b3

126 S. JOHN, C. III. 

His good pleasure. For though it were so that the faithful were 

without measure and number, but in succession innumerable, yet 

would Christ as the Head over all cause His Spirit and His grace 

to flow into them as His members. Hear what S. Jerome says on 

the nth chapter of Isaiah: "Upon this flower which suddenly 

ariseth from the stem and root of Jesse through Mary the Virgin, 

the Spirit of the Lord shall rest. For God was pleased that in Him 

should dwell all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, by no means 

partially, as in all the rest of the saints, but according to the Gospel 

of the Nazarenes, which is read by them in the Hebrew tongue, 

' All the fountain of the Holy Ghost shall descend upon Him.' 

 

Wherefore whatsoever Jesus doeth, or saith, that is holy, that is 

spiritual, that is Divine. For He is wholly possessed by the Holy 

Spirit. The Holy Spirit rules, guides, moves Him. He puts into 

His heart and mouth words to speak. He works and performs 

the miracles by which He confirms His words. Wherefore he 

who receives Him, and believes in Him, receives God the Father 

and the Holy Ghost. It was different with John the Baptist and 

the Prophets. For they were not so possessed by the Holy Ghost 

but that they might do and say many things by their own proper 

spirit, and both be deceived and deceive. So Nathan the Prophet 

was in error when he told David, as from God's mouth, to build 

the Temple (i Sam. vii. 3). 

Ver. 35. 

 

The Father loveth, &c. As God the Father loveth the 

Son without measure, so He giveth all things into His hand, that is, at 

His disposal and power without measure. All things, both corporeal 

and spiritual : all things, both in heaven and earth, and consequently 

all the gifts of the Holy Ghost, that He may bestow them upon 

those who believe in Him, according to His own good pleasure. 

Again, all things, that is, every right which the Holy Trinity has 

over men and things created, this He hath given to the Son, not 

only as He is God, but as He is man, that He may do with them 

whatsoever He willeth. Hear Euthymius, " As God had all things 

(for all things were made by Him), this possession also hath He given to Him (Christ) as He is man. In a suitable manner it hath

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwLXTnpxE5QRq5cpFjwc-zAr7tcMyYREy8TMuei8ymBSMHdsJKGiGSKGXzKBFrHSREHCRpfS1JlnfHi4jciOF-RC5Sv5D7sYHSbl8sLxW6ch7pEJhQb-SbiwWeivqdYPHAjoq7bWA=w615-h900-v0

d0978e32-176f-49a0-8433-1040749433ed

TO HAVE LIFE. 1 27 

been said, ' He loveth, and He hath given,' as is said among men. 

For fathers are wont to love their sons, and to give them what is 

theirs." 

Ver. 36. 

 

He that believeth, &c. Hath, in hope and of right, as in 

the root and seed, but not yet in deed and fruit, nor even actually. 

He hath faith and grace, which give him the right to glory. But it 

is grace begun in the spiritual knowledge and love of God, which 

will be perfected after death in heaven. As it is said (John xvii. 3), 

This is life eternal (the way and commencement of life), that they 

may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou 

hast sent. 

But he that believeth not, &c, shall not see, i.e., shall not enjoy. 

Wrath of God abideth, the vengeance of God, and hell, shall eter-

nally punish him. Hear Cyril, " They shall not see life, i.e., not even 

as far as the bare sight of it pertains, shall they be able to attain 

to the life of the saints. They shall not taste of those joys, they 

shall not see that true life. They shall be tormented with sufferings 

worse than any kind of death, and only retain their souls in their 

bodies through the sense of pain."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz4_kuP2m_S3FlWRcdqJbRGdMmUQ3G7CPn47aY7N-oRhQXLTZNMKQWaz0YEzxWA4ob10zJG-TySSum2lsW9vK8sMvhl3hRSAzZYsWQJBBHNrd9k8rmOo3cY9h3Bd_CNFX1X6Y_r=w615-h900-v0

2f821eae-1f7a-439b-941a-52090143f3cc

( 128 ) 

CHAPTER IV. 

1 Christ talketh with a woman of Samaria. 27 His disciples marvel. 31 

Christ's zeal for God's glory. 43 He departeth into Galilee, and healeth 

the ruler's son. 

WHEN therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus 

made and baptized more disciples than John, 

2 (Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciplesj 

3 He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee. 

4 And he must needs go through Samaria. 

5 Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the 

parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. 

6 Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, 

sat thus on the well ; and it was about the sixth hour. 

7 There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saith unto her, 

Give me to drink. 

8 (For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.) 

9 Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a 

Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria ?—for the Jews have no 

dealings with the Samaritans. 

10 Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who 

it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink ; thou wouldest have asked of him, and 

he would have given thee living water. 

11 The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the 

well is deep : from whence then hast thou that living water? 

12 Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank 

thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle ? 

1 

 

Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall 

thirst again 

 

14 But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst 

 

but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up 

into everlasting life. 

15 The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither 

come hither to draw. 

16 Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither. 

17 The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her, 

Thou hast well said, I have no husband : 

1 

 

For thou hast had five husbands ; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband : in that saidst thou truly.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxnIhTTaPjSRReQt8J6kCnuSzTt2JH9JIEGI_przGzV3ig4jWOz-ddWqw3gDu_XQcbBiC0TeiZ-RRHvpHGiectZwYXBZr-bT8o8vH6COA4israHWZyWz-sO_7RbR8rzzGagzQF6=w615-h900-v0

104f4ff1-4a42-4d4c-beac-9c01f38963b6

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. I2Q 

19 The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. 

20 Our fathers worshipped in this mountain ; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is 

the place where men ought to worship. 

21 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall 

neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. 

22 Ye worship ye know not what : we know what we worship : for salvation 

is of the Jews. 

23 But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship 

the Father in spirit and in truth : for the Father seeketh such to worship him. 

24 God is a Spirit : and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and 

in truth. 

25 The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called 

Christ : when he is come, he will tell us all things. 

26 Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am he. 

27 IT And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the 

woman : yet no man said, What seekest thou ? or, Why talkest thou with her ? 

28 The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith 

to the men, 

29 Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did : is not this 

the Christ ? 

30 Then they went out of the city, and came unto him. 

31 1T In the meanwhile his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat. 

32 But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. 

33 Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought him 

ought to eat ? 

34 Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and 

to finish his work. 

35 Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest? behold, 

I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields ; for they are white 

already to harvest. 

36 And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal 

 

that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together. 

37 And herein is that saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth. 

38 I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour : other men laboured, 

and ye are entered into their labours. 

39 IT And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying 

of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did. 

40 So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he 

would tarry with them : and he abode there two days. 

41 And many more believed because of his own word 

; 

42 And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying : for 

we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour 

of the world. 

43 IT Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee. 

44 For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his own 

country. 

45 Then when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having 

seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem »* the feast : for they also went unto 

the feast. 

VOL. IV, J

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzunvXKZhIVHIIQioyJ0ZJsJgkaB1Ey2n_O4T75Pbj9KAag3qbyvGxuM8aeKXihB2cecs_HHaZ_3ppcmjGjrhnJpnzSaBSw6_g7RWFw9zD7ZtHW69_2rANUMczh3bKugmD8iMSR=w615-h900-v0

bad81fe5-4888-47e8-a06b-3f1303d37c96

130 S. JOHN, C. IV 

46 So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine. 

And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum. 

47 When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto 

him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his son : for he was 

at the point of death. 

48 Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not 

believe. 

49 The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die. 

50 Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way ; thy son liveth. And the man believed 

the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. 

51 And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying, 

Thy son liveth. 

52 Then inquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they 

said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. 

53 So the father knew that it was at the same hour, in the which Jesus said 

unto him, Thy son liveth : and himself believed, and his whole house. 

54 This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of 

Judea into Galilee. 

When therefore Jesus knew, &c. than John, that is, than John 

had made and baptized, says S. Augustine (lib. 2, de cons. Evang., 

c. 18), for John was now in prison. For these things had happened 

through the occasion of John's imprisonment. For Jesus, knowing 

of John's imprisonment, and fearing the envy and calumny of the 

Pharisees, who had already stirred up Herod against John, that they 

might not be the means of casting Himself also into prison through 

the instrumentality of Herod or Pilate, and put Him to death before 

the time predetermined by the Father, prudently retired out of Judea 

into Galilee. See what has been said about this on Matt. iv. 12. 

Although Jesus, &c. Both because Jesus was occupied in the 

greater works of preaching and healing the sick; as Paul saith, 

"Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel" (1 

Cor. i. 17), also that He might show that the efficacy of His baptism 

was greater than that of John's. See what has been said on iii. 32. 

He left Judea, &c. Not as though He feared death, but that He might mollify the envy of the Pharisees, says S. Chrysostom. For 

the Pharisees were very influential. For most of the priests, 

senators, and magistrates belonged to their sect. This was the 

second occasion of Christ retiring into Galilee, the first being in 

chap. i. 43.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAysP_IUG2mL5HVkQvBNbvVZUypSmVn9lNdH1e9JbTSYQZxeky0DhcSGpbuklcG_IY--GoMl3tt6LyYRBb90-U8I5BEx1yEL3R731vu3vW98FX72lsqbcA6utACftzy1m1qnz8F5JQ=w615-h900-v0

e80d2e6b-56eb-4f72-93d6-7d0bc4c1c828

HISTORY OF SICHEM. 131 

He must needs, &c. For Samaria lies betwixt Jmlea and Galilee. 

Cyril observes that Christ does not here go counter to his own 

command, by which He enjoined on His apostles not to go into the 

cities of the Samaritans (S. Matt. x. 5). For He there forbids them 

not to go to the Samaritans of set purpose, nor to continuously evan-

gelise them, lest they should prejudice the Jews, who were their 

enemies, against themselves and the faith of Christ. Jesus on this 

occasion was only passing through Samaria on His way to Galilee. 

Samaria was the district which was occupied by the tribe of 

Ephraim, and half the tribe of Manasseh. It took its name of 

Samaria from the royal city, which was built upon the hill Somer. 

See 1 Kings xvi. 24. 

Ver. 5. 

 

He came therefore, &c. Sichar, i.e., Sichetn. When Jero-

boam revolted from Rehoboam, and usurped the kingdom of the 

Ten Tribes, he made this city his capital. The capital was after-

wards transferred by Omri to Samaria. Afterwards, in the time 

of Alexander the Great, Sichem was again made the capital of the 

region of Samaria, as Josephus testifies {Ant., ii. 8), and was called 

Neapolis. In the time of our Saviour Sichem was corrupted into 

Sichar. It is now called Naplous. This city was the site of many 

famous deeds mentioned in Scripture. Abraham journeying from 

Mesopotamia into Canaan, came first to Sichem, and built an altar 

to the Lord, and received the promise of that land. See Gen. xii. 

and xiii. 

Jacob also returning from Mesopotamia fixed his tent here, and 

bought a piece of ground from the sons of Emmor (Gen. xxxiii.) 

Here Dinah, his daughter, was corrupted by the son of the King of 

Sichem (Gen. xxxiv.) Sichem was appointed one of the cities of 

refuge (Josh. xx. ) Here the ten tribes revolted from Judea through 

the folly of Rehoboam. The bones of Joseph were buried at 

Sichem, as is related at the end of the Book of Joshua. S. Terome 

(tract, de loc. Heir.) says that Salem and Sichem were the same. 

Hence it follows that Melchisedec, the type of Christ, was also king 

of this city. 

Near the parcel of ground, &c. See what I have said on Ge-n,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy42WDCbuL9s8acaO7tI2jpfxOjIuZaEIi5_wZAB0OkvQy7dMapfliJr9yuynQVBqZ8uQRrm5pImM4BtM49kzpzpmIZ23u9dBewo0MEKdNHnPdtEiRz3aRIXAWQbjM7CRemI1K5=w615-h900-v0

c28884d7-6c16-4ea2-85de-c80ca68c2f1c

1^2 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

xlviii. 22. Wherefore Joseph when he was dying in Egypt com-

manded his bones to be translated to Sichem, as to his own piece 

of land, which had been left him by the will of his father. 

Ver. 6.—Jacob'sfountain (Vulg.) This fountain was a well dug by 

Jacob, as appears from ver. 12. This is the meaning of the Hebrew 

beer. So S. Augustine says, giving the meaning of fons in Latin, 

" Every well is a fountain, but not every fountain a well. Where 

water springs out of the earth, and affords drink, it is called a 

fountain. If it is on the surface it is called a fountain only : but if 

it be deep, it is called a well, and loses the name of fountain." 

Varro derives the word fons from fundo, to pour. A fountain, he 

says, is where living water is poured out of the earth. Jacob'sfount 

therefore was a well which Jacob had dug in this place for the use 

of himself and his family. Or he may have bought it of the 

Shechemites, as Ruperti thinks. 

Jesus therefore being wearied ; for He went about among the towns 

and villages on foot, even till His death. His apostles followed His 

example. Blessed Xavier and his followers lately did the same in 

India. Piously does S. Augustine say (Tract. 15), "Not in vain 

is Jesus wearied ; not in vain is the power of God fatigued : for not 

vainly is He wearied by whom the weary are refreshed. Not in 

vain is He wearied, when if He forsake us, we are weary, but if He 

be present with us, we are strong. For though Jesus was wearied 

with His journey, yet it was the strength of Christ which has created 

thee. The strength of Christ made thee, that that which was not 

might be : the weakness of Christ caused that that which was should 

not perish. He formed us by His strength : He sought us by His 

weakness. Therefore He Himself cherishes the weak, as a hen her 

chickens, for to her He compared Himself." 

Upon the fount Greek, sitl rfj irriyfj, ai the fount, or near the 

well. Or strictly, above the fount, because the bubbling water was 

deep down in the well. 

Sat thus: where He conveniently could. He sat upon the 

ground without a seat, as wayfarers are wont to sit down beside 

wells and fountains, tor the sake of rest and refreshment. So S.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxUvPPwEMNxRtZJnu-fXBkmwqYrdZH8j6gYC9ncav9t0DQUuDI6-WsQgElYCVg-Qw63ArzB3V8KfrrXYjpsgYXk856vuqYoA0PLCpETG5p7-hl5TGuFbgrKxzRQn0AdUY31ecW_Og=w615-h900-v0

95e99e23-51dc-4581-a575-81bf858623a9

JACOB'S WELL. I 33 

Chrysostom and Euthymius. Or more simply, He sat thus, means, 

as being tired with His journey. He sat as men are wont to sit 

when they are tired, showing by so doing that they are weary. So 

Cajetan and others. 

3. Sat thus may mean, in this way, i.e., under the circumstances 

which I will now pass under review. He sat thus, i.e., when it was 

the sixth hour, and the woman came to draw water, and the 

disciples had gone away to buy food. 

Sixth hour. He gives the reason why Jesus sat at the fountain ; 

because He was wearied, hungry, and thirsty. It was the sixth 

hour, or mid-day, when the heat is greatest. Nonnus renders, It 

was the hour bringing thirst. 

A woman of Samaria : of the district, not the city of Samaria. 

She came from the city of Sichar, which was near the well. 

Jesus saith to her. Jesus took the initiative in conversing with 

her. For He knew that the woman, being a Samaritan, would not 

do so, but would dislike Him as being a Jew. But " He who 

desired to drink thirsted for the faith of the woman," says S. 

Augustine. Observe the wonderful affability and charity of Christ, 

in seeking to enter into conversation with a wretched harlot, that 

He might convert her, and through her a whole city. 

Ver. 8. 

 

For His disciples, &c. The word for gives the reason 

why Jesus asked drink of the woman ; because His disciples, from 

whom otherwise He would have sought food and drink, had gone 

into the city to buy food. For Jesus wished to drink beside the 

well, and to drink from it, just as poor travellers are wont to do, 

especially in Syria and Arabia, and other hot countries where there 

is a scarcity of water. This happened by Christ's tacit providence, 

that His disciples being all gone away into the city, He might by 

Himself be able more easily, in talking with this immodest woman, 

to spare her shame, and disclose her immodesty, and so convert 

her to faith and modesty. 

Ver. 9.— The woman therefore saith, &c. Therefore in Greek and 

Hebrew often merely marks the beginning of a sentence. Here, how-

ever, it denotes an inference from the preceding question of Christ.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzXaObdPZqDbx-zfg2oTaO_jAR-cEXhTKDimIQc2bLrFItRbJVX-BA6qxkQx501KNRB3idtFcb_eIQZGTF-ZVqR7150YXWVUrkEreUs_nID_kMjmmO5s1qSNUpa7_Xf5hIrImoSwA=w615-h900-v0

89f3b7df-34ea-481c-9fee-99b0cb2350ce

134 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

Jesus had asked the woman for water ; the woman therefore replied 

to His question, How is it, &c. The woman recognised Jesus to 

be a Jew from His dress and speech, which Christ, out of good 

feeling to His country, accommodated to that of his fellow-

countrymen. 

For theJews, &c, i.e., have no intercourse, do not use the same 

bed, or cup, or vessel, as though they were impure and abominable 

on account of their schism. These words may be either those of 

the Evangelist, or of the Samaritan woman. In either case they 

are very appropriate. Learn from this example how we ought to 

shun the friendship, looks, and conversation of heretics; for "their 

speech doth eat as doth a cancer," saith S. Paul. 

Ver. 10. 

 

-Jesus answered, &c. If thou knewest thegift of God. This 

gift is (i.) common, what God has given to every man, "if thou 

knowest that I am Christ, the Saviour of the world." 2. Especial 

to thyself, what God now manifests to thee through Me, that 

through My conversation thou mayest have an opportunity of 

salvation, that thou mayest believe in Me, and so be justified and 

saved. So Maldonatus. 

Thou perchance wouldst have asked, Greek, eu civ %rri«a,{ aurbv, i.e., 

thou surely wouldst have asked. For av here is an expletive and 

confirmatory particle. The Vulgate, however, has forsitan, perchance, 

to denote the free will of the asker. 

And He would have given, &c. Christ leads her from earthly 

water to spiritual water. Let religious and apostolical men do 

likewise. Observe, as a stagnant lake, or pool, is termed dead, 

because it moves not; so, on the contrary, flowing water is called 

living water, especially that which leaps forth, as it were, from 

fountains, as though animated by a living spirit. 

Moreover, Christ's evangelical doctrine is here called living 

water: so are the Holy Ghost and His grace. So S. Cyril, and 

other authors passim. It is called water (1.) because, like water, it 

cleanses the soul from sin. Indeed, it gives the soul new beauty 

and adornment, which water does not do : according to the words, 

"Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow." Again,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxjKz5wjJ9b4L_pmjH8VPIeSc-T01GJg7QIAKJxF_a-EaWIe54HHZifdBTEk5hXoXCudoZRbvpyyAb8GJ7GbyP7Vt8ur4WdwN3s5m8S66n07ODDftLCw5YEjMSKqhllCzGYqkxLWQ=w615-h900-v0

b316313a-cccf-44a4-8b8b-b6f294654261

SPIRITUAL MEANING OF WATER. 1 35 

though water washes, it likewise weakens and destroys. For we 

see that clothes which are washed, are cleansed indeed, but are worn 

away. But it is not thus with the Holy Ghost, for He cleanses the 

soul, and at the same time gives it greater strength. And the more 

the soul is washed the stronger it becomes. 

2. Because the Holy Ghost and His grace cool the heat of con-

cupiscence, and all the other passions of the soul. 

3. Because it quenches spiritual thirst. 

4. Because as water fertilises the earth, trees, and plants, so does 

grace render the soul fruitful in good works and all virtues. But 

grace does a greater work than water : for it elevates the soul, so 

that it not only produces natural good fruit, but the supernatural 

fruit of faith, hope, and charity, according to the words, " He that 

abideth in Me, the same bringeth forth much fruit." Again, water 

from a pear-tree produces pears, from a rose-bush roses. But grace 

brings forth in one and the same soul the fruits of all virtues, and 

that in a soul which before was so polluted by sin that it produced 

nothing but the evil fruits of wickedness. 

Moreover, the Holy Spirit and His grace are called living water. 

1. Because the Holy Ghost liveth in Himself with the fulness of 

His Divinity a blessed and Divine life, and imparts this His own 

life to the believing soul. Indeed, the Holy Ghost, with the Father 

and the Son, is uncreated and essential Life Itself, from which the 

natural and supernatural life of all angels, men, animals, and plants 

flows as from a fountain, yea, an ocean. 

2. Because the grace of the Holy Spirit is the form by which life 

is lived according to the Spirit. Therefore grace is, as it were, the 

soul of the soul ; the soul, I say, of virtue and holiness. 

3. Because by His grace the Holy Ghost, who is Life Itself, 

dwells within us, and quickens us. 

4. Because He effects that the soul shall be continually renewed 

unto what is good, ever arranging new steps in the heart, by which 

it mounts to better and higher things, according to the words 

in the 84th Psalm, ver. 6, "He hath disposed ascensions in His 

heart" (Vulg.) For as S. Ambrose says, "The grace of the Holy

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwrK6tcAK3q6vvic3cEK8hJbU8CHPcQqXyLmYalM0B8I6HEoCrcPzR4lFRguQwJgdbP-H0HcE5NVx_8RroRKir53Njn3xcb2D8h91IIZWwXgnrzUtMqqcRSA-3jGNYz63otSR09=w615-h900-v0

d01aea2d-3a25-450d-a3ab-ce0c12b7c700

136 S. JOHN, c. IV. 

Spirit knows not tardy efforts, but constrains the soul to ascend with 

the Blessed Virgin the hills of virtues." 

5. S. Augustine says, Living water is so called, because it flows 

in such a manner that it is united with its fount or source. What 

is called dead water is that which is cut off from its source. Grace 

therefore is called living water because it is never separated from 

Us fount, which is the Holy Ghost. Just as the Holy Ghost Him-

self is inseparable from His source, which is the Father and the 

Son, and ever liveth most closely united with them in the Divine 

Essence. Wherefore although the Holy Ghost pours Himself 

into the soul, yet He departeth not from the Father and the Son 

 

yea, He causes the Father and the Son to enter into the soul 

together with Himself, that they all may dwell therein, as in their 

temple, according to the words (John xiv. 23), " If any man loveth 

Me he will keep My word, and My Father will love him : and we 

will come unto him, and make our abode with him." So S. Cyril 

{lib. 2, c. 22), "He calls the grace of the Spirit living, because it 

is life-giving; and because it is united to its source, and makes us 

to be united." For grace always depends upon the Holy Spirit, 

and by it the Spirit dwells in us, and is united with us, and by it 

we are united to Him, according to the words, Your members are 

the temple of the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. vi.) 

6. The water of a fountain being brought down into the valleys 

by means of pipes, can again from them, by the continuous rush 

of the water from the fount, be drawn to as great a height as its 

original source. This is proved by constant experience. In like 

manner heavenly grace, like a fountain of gifts and virtues, flowing 

down from the Holy Ghost out of heaven, makes us to leap back 

as it were thither as high as its source, even to God and heaven. 

The water which I shall give him shall be in him a fount of water 

leafing up into eternal life (John v. 14, Vulg.) 

Ver. 11. 

 

The woman, &c. The Greek is, Thou hast not an-X>j,u,a, 

a pitcher, or waterpot. Observe, the fountain is here called a well, 

and is said to be deep. Rupertus writes that its depth was forty 

cubits.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwbsloGmqwfiwqcQlO_v4Kw4DNR5p_SO4fJHC71GgDQq_ohjLOBC2mru6HlRB7EmQgzN70QvNeHzyI6TjowqTb1kIf5KhxQwb0FUi0YJADMxUehjKufpe7IYpetaVK9mZiGewDaaw=w615-h900-v0

ec4a02f9-55df-4360-849d-6eacb41699d6

THE SAMARITANS. \%J 

Ver. 12. 

 

Art Thou greater, &c. Observe, the Samaritans were 

Assyrians whom Salmanasar had brought into Samaria instead of the 

original inhabitants, the ten tribes of Israel, whom he carried away 

into Assyria. These Assyrians, however, wished, when the Jewish 

state was in a flourishing condition, to be accounted Jews {Jos., Ant., 

lib. ii, cap. ult.), both because they dwelt in the portion of the Holy 

Land which had been allotted to the tribe of Ephraim, and because 

they were commingled with the Israelites who had been left in the 

country. Another reason was because they partly followed the 

Jewish religion. For they worshipped the God of Israel, together 

with the Assyrian idols (2 Kings xvii.) This then was why the 

woman called Jacob our father, as though the Samaritans were 

Israelites, and descended from him. The meaning then is, " Jacob 

had no better water than this, for if he had had, he surely would 

have drank of it, both himself, and his children. If thou, therefore, 

O Jesus, art able to give, or to find better water than this, Thou 

must needs be greater than the Patriarch Jacob, our father." So 

S. Chrysostom. By degrees did Jesus raise the woman's mind, so 

that she should at length acknowledge Him to be the Messiah. 

For from what He had said, If thou knewest who it is that saith 

to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him, and 

He would have given thee living water, the woman conjectured, 

or suspected, that Jesus was making Himself to be greater than 

Jacob. 

Ver. 13.—Jesus answered, &c. Jesus modestly points out to this 

woman, who was extolling the water of her own well, that His living 

water must be far better, because it would quench all, even future 

thirst. From this He tacitly left it to be gathered that He was 

superior to Jacob. As S. Chrysostom says, " He did not say that 

He was greater, because He would have seemed to be boasting of 

Himself, not yet being known ; but this meaning lay hid under His 

words. For He said not simply, 1 will give thee water ; but taking 

no notice of Jacob's water, He praises His own, wishing to show 

its difference from the (different) nature of the givers of the gifts, 

and how greatly He excelled the Patriarch." S. Cyril adds, " He

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx-mty4oY3HRN_QvWqDktz3Zl0SN0RSh38Ct9thVRGUsF3gxEmiB-X3hLjjM7QpQwi67KOcLoi1jQt09xT0Ko-F-i5CdAXCLQnzscvaqnnrOb-eLE0kq4DfcgHrT1KfjeLLdBKiCw=w615-h900-v0

746bc4a0-3598-4c8d-b623-5992efe60d78

1 38 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

showed that sensible and earthly water was infinitely inferior to that 

which He would have her understand " (that He would give her). 

Whoso drinketh, &c. Tropologically, S. Augustine : " The water 

in the well," he says, " is the pleasure of the world in a dark abyss, 

which men draw with the pitcher of desire. For this makes men 

always to thirst, because cupidity is insatiable." 

But whoso shall drink, &c. Meaning, He that shall receive from 

Me living water, that is, the grace of the Holy Spirit, shall no more 

thirst for justice, the friendship of God, virtue, or holiness, because he 

shall already have them through grace. We must understand, unless 

he should wilfully squander and lose this water of grace by deadly 

sin. This is Christ's antithesis : Common water, O woman, such 

as thine out of this well, when drunk, only quenches thirst for a 

brief space, because it does not remain in the body. But this water 

of Mine, which is the grace of the Holy Spirit, is in itself of such 

efficacy, that if it be even once tasted, it will suffice to banish 

thirst for ever. For it will always abide in the soul, the same and 

immutable. For the habitual grace of the ordinary Law of God, 

brings with itself at set times prevenient helps, that is to say, the 

impulses of exciting grace, which, as they are needful, so also they 

suffice, for retaining the spiritual vigour of the soul, and also its 

perseverance unto salvation. This is the teaching of the Council 

of Trent (Sess. 6, c. 16). 

You will ask, Why then is it said in the Book of Ecclesiasticus, 

" They that drink me shall yet be thirsty ? " For this would seem 

to be contrary to what Christ here says of His grace, He shall not 

thirst for ever. I answer that the meaning of "they that drink 

me shall yet be thirsty," is, they shall desire to be still more filled 

with that wisdom of God which they already possess. They will 

wish for an increase of the wisdom and grace of God. Thus S. 

Ignatius the martyr, when, being condemned to the lions, he came 

into the amphitheatre of Rome, said, looking round at the spec-

tators, " I am come hither to die for my Jesus, for whom I thirst 

unquenchably, that I may be united to Him in heaven." 

Observe, that the Holy Spirit by His grace begins to fulfil in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyBuByhIcRyL6ZE4YMHQi02vk_qWSmqfkrPIGBoP9hLST9ZWAbKDsybsTmJd_aGmMr25dhyhKHz_slvr1xUvNgeguZY495kRoQ8MgrnZBdnRrdKLEmiwupF5mA9LdV8J2WyJs7xXg=w615-h900-v0

7409a3cf-c48f-4697-b609-0f485d59663f

ETERNAL LIFE. 139 

this life all the thirst and desire of the soul, but in heaven He does 

this perfectly. Also He extinguishes the thirst of pride and con-

cupiscence. Lastly, in heaven He altogether takes away all the 

hunger and thirst of the soul, every defect and trouble, through 

the glory and endowment of impassibility, according to the words, 

"I shall be satisfied when Thy glory shall appear" (Ps. xvii. 15) : 

also, " They shall not hunger nor thirst any more ; neither shall 

the heat, nor the sun smite them " (Isa. xlix. 10). As the Gloss 

says, " He promises the fulness of the Spirit, which shall be in the 

resurrection, because with Him is the fountain of life with which 

they shall be inebriated. Heavenly glory therefore makes up all 

defects both of soul and body, all desires, and all thirst. "For 

beatitude is a perfect state through the aggregation of all goods," 

says Boethius, according as it is said, " Thou shalt give them drink 

out of the torrent of Thy pleasure " (Ps. xxxvi. 9). 

Ver. 14.—But the water, &c. waters leaping up (Syriac). The 

allusion is to those fountains which flow with such an impetus, the 

water behind pressing on that which is before, that although they 

be brought down into the valleys, yet by means of pipes they 

ascend to the level of the original spring. Thus the grace of the 

Holy Spirit draws the soul to its source, which is God and heaven. 

For grace is the seed of glory. The Arabic translates, The water 

which I will give, shall be in him water which shall bring a flood of 

eternal life. Grace then propels, as it were, a man to heaven, and never rests until it carries him where there is no thirst, nor defect, 

nor misery, but where all is abundance, and all is happiness. For 

this is the meaning of everlasting life. For this fountain of grace 

which is in the soul is derived from its original Spring, which is 

the Holy Ghost in heaven, even like a fountain which, being artifici-

ally conducted, bursts forth in a square, or garden, but is derived 

from its original spring in some mountain. 

2. It shall be in him a fount, because, as Theophylact says, the 

water of grace which Christ instils into the faithful soul is being 

ever multiplied in it. For the saints receive the seeds and begin-

ning of good through grace, but they themselves " trade " with it,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyGn38yAY2rUa18lNM6Jm7f2hC7SMwFmZMnvHWb_PgbM_CJB5z-U_6EhRhmx-11XuLgx0JLjP1ZbtDWFFgY2J5YbVVbyyvI49LPP2IHheGos9-WA1chXt6rnffVHbYMPdwH31l1LA=w615-h900-v0

174a9195-580f-4ddc-8726-449dd58fbe2a

140 S. JOHN, c. IV 

and work for its increase, that, as it were a fountain, it may 

abound in them, and afford abundant drink, not only to them-

selves, but to many others. As S. Chrysostom says, "He that 

hath a fountain in himself is not troubled with thirst." And 

Origen, "Every one of the angels hath in him a fount of water 

welling up unto life eternal from the Word Himself." 

3. A fountain, the more it flows downward, the more water there 

flows into it from above. So too the more any one pours his own 

grace upon others, the more God causes to flow into him. 

Lastly, this is a paradox spoken by Christ, that whereas earthly 

water flows downwards, this His fountain flows upwards, according 

to the saying, Thefounts of the holy rivers are borne upwards. Here 

is a great and marvellous leap, the mighty and infinite power of the 

Holy Ghost, which makes the earthy and laden hearts of men to 

leap from earth to highest heaven, from grace to glory, from the 

flesh to the spirit, from death to life eternal, from Satan to God. 

To believers therefore it is said, Stirsum corda. And this is a sure 

sign of the indwelling of grace and the Holy Ghost, if our minds 

are occupied in heaven, if we speak and do heavenly things, if we 

say, with S. Paul, "Our conversation is in heaven." For this cause 

Christ came down from heaven, that He might make us to rise from 

earth to heaven, according to the words, " Behold he cometh, leaping 

upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills " (Cant. ii. 8). 

The woman saith, &c. "She was delighted," says S. Austin, 

"not to thirst, and thought that this promise was made unto her 

by the Lord in a fleshly sense. Her poverty drove her to the 

labour of coming and drawing water from a well at a distance from 

the town ; and her weakness shrank from this toil. The woman, 

who was carnal and ignorant, did not yet understand that Christ 

was speaking of the spiritual water of grace. Then He smote her 

with another dart, that she might have loftier thoughts concerning 

Him." 

Therefore Jesus saith unto her, Go call thy husband. Observe 

from S. Chrysostom and others that Christ bade the woman call her 

husband with this pretext, that it would not be proper to give this so

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzbbsPVNDgPDu6jl0sLCuv_CFvTZSypNCQ4hWR07Ivr1v8x-2NG73zhwYOv3y4XZJRjG_W-AiY632L_9RPrfu-Lc2qxiPguXhfgNN6ZaHX-cOFvoppvM3gH3fj5dR7ndOsIAL-WGw=w615-h900-v0

e088aff3-985c-46c1-b824-ba4626b65efc

CHRIST'S GENTLE REPROOF. 141 

great a gift of living water to a married woman without the know-

ledge of her husband. But Christ really intended to open out to 

her the hidden things of her life, and her secret fornication, that 

so He might draw her confession from her, and arouse her to 

repentance. At the same time He would show her that He was 

more than a mere man, that He was the Christ, from whom she 

might ask and expect remission of her sins and everlasting salvation. 

For this was the living water which Christ set forth. 

Ver. 17.— The woman answered, &c. From hence it is plain that 

this woman was thus a widow, and therefore not an adulteress, but a 

harlot, unless indeed her lover were married, in which case both 

were guilty of adultery. 

Ver. 18. 

 

For thou hast had, &c. Nonnus says, For thou hast 

hadfive husbands, one after another ; and he whom thou now hast is 

not thy lawful husband. So S. Austin, Bede, Euthymius, and others 

passim. But S. Chrysostom and Maldonatus think they were unlaw-

ful, adulterous connections, and that they are here spoken of by 

Christ in this sense, that she was now living with a sixth adulterer. 

But the former sense is the more probable, because Christ makes 

an antithesis between the five former, which were lawful connec-

tions, and this sixth, which was unlawful. 

Observe here the gentle and courteous method of Christ's 

reproof. He does not say directly to the woman, " Thou art an 

adulteress, or a fornicatrix : do penance for thy fornications." But 

He praises her for speaking the truth in saying, she had no husband. 

Then He adds, He whom thou now hast is not thy husband, tacitly 

implying that she was living in sin with him, and that He knew 

of this secret sin by the revelation of God, and therefore that He was a prophet, from whom she ought to ask pardon and grace. 

S. Basil (Epist. 2, ad Amphiloch.) says that a third marriage is 

an abomination to the Church, but better than fornication. And 

in his first epistle to the same he says, "The thrice married are 

often excommunicated for three or four years, not longer : and 

such unions are called polygamy, or qualified fornication. There-

fore the Lord said to the Samaritan woman, who had had five

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz9KOp3sUnRSUt7HaENSJEI4JeGFQZUcBhqO4O5DBVps5w7M_-V7CpIDWQ_xpBxiTomYxliuL4L3a7f9YWoEME0Ps9Ktmu7AnS4BnrvgrUcmgw0YNsIDk035nZkDb1TXAPAjDFc=w615-h900-v0

5ccafc44-ab54-4b8b-8e1a-4995d9d28505

142 S. JOHN, C. IV 

husbands, He whom thou now hast is not thy husband, surely 

because those who had gone beyond a second union were not 

worthy the name of husband, or wife." But the Church is now of 

a different mind. For it is certain that fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, 

or more marriages, are licit, although they are indecent, and 

marks of incontinence. And this is what S. Basil appears to 

have meant. 

Ver. 19. 

 

The woman, &c. Because Thou revealest the hidden 

things of my life, whether good or bad, which Thou couldest not 

know except by the revelation of God, especially since thou art a 

Jew and a foreigner, I humbly accept Thy gentle reproof, and 

confess my sin. "By one and the same confession," says Rupertus, 

" she confessed, as to herself, what she was, and as to Him, what 

she was able to perceive He was." 

Ver. 20. Ourfathers, &c. The woman, acknowledging Jesus to 

be a prophet, now proposes a question concerning religion, which 

was at that time a great source of controversy between the Jews 

and the Samaritans. This she did that she might know which 

side she ought to take, so that she might provide for her salva-

tion. For she was more agitated by this question than by thirst for 

the living water which Christ promised her, which she did not 

understand. 

Worshipped: observe that by worship here and elsewhere is signified 

}he whole public ritual of worshipping God, especially by means of 

sacrifices, and the other ceremonies instituted by Moses at God's 

mouth. This public worship could only be offered in the Tabernacle 

erected by Moses, and afterwards in the Temple built by Solomon. 

This is plain from God's law in Deut. xiv. 24. For otherwise, by 

natural and Divine right, it ever has been, and is lawful to worship 

and call upon God privately always and in every place. Thus 

in Gen. xxii. 5, Abraham said to his servants, "After we have 

worshipped, i.e., sacrificed, we will come again to you." 

In this mountain : Garizim, which overhangs the city of Sichem. 

From this mountain Jotham, the son of Gideon, cursed the Sichemites, 

(Judges ix. 7).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzDnIEs1QxlLxSX8qoaSpRv_7VSZm0OhoCq2nCZLqwwSLCFKqUrTVlPZpkYC0Vu60BvJIAaWS3RJjBPmgc7DEpeZ-eG5Zul1A0aYJG_MfJ41pZpSibK8C4_INesJX8JnkMFLM9OoA=w615-h900-v0

aaf7e244-e498-4dd3-b5f1-50d3062b23a9

MOUNT GARIZIM. 143 

There was a famous and unending controversy between the 

Samaritans and the Jews concerning worshipping and sacrificing in 

this mountain. In the time of Alexander the Great, Manasses, the 

brother of Jaddi, the High Priest who met Alexander, and appeased 

him, when he was incensed against the Jews, married a foreign 

wife, the daughter of Sanballat, whom Darius, the last king of Persia, 

had set over Samaria. Manasses, being excluded by his brother 

from the performance of sacerdotal functions, fled to his father-in-

law, Sanballat. Sanballat built a noble temple on Mount Garizim, 

and appointed Manasses to be its priest. Thither fled many Jewish 

refugees, especially those who, like Manasses, had married strange 

wives, contrary to the Law. As an excuse they made use of the 

argument that Sichem was celebrated for the worship and sacrifices 

of the Patriarchs, as of Jacob (Gen. xxxiii. 20; Josh. xxiv. 1), of the 

Tribes (Deut. xxvii. 12), where Moses by God's command bids 

Joshua to build an altar on Mount Garizim, and there offer burnt-

offerings, and engrave the Decalogue on stones, and promulge the 

Law of God to the Twelve Tribes, with blessings to those who kept 

it, the people answering " Amen." 

This temple stood upon Mount Garizim for 200 years, until it 

was destroyed by Hyrcanus, son of Simon, the brother of Judas 

Maccabeus {Jos., Ant., I. 3, c. 17). Josephus also relates that the 

Jews and Samaritans referred their controversy for settlement to 

Ptolemy Philometor, King of Egypt, who decided it in favour of the 

Jews, on the ground that the latter had built their temple at the 

instance of Moses. But the Samaritans were not contented with 

this decision, and still persisted in their schism. 

Ver. 21.—Jesus satth, &c. Ye, i.e., whosoever rightly, according 

to God's ordinance, wish to worship God the Father. The meaning 

is, the hour cometh, the time of the Evangelical Law and doctrine, 

about to be instituted by Me, by which, immediately after My death, 

which is shortly to come to pass, the Law of Moses shall be abolished, 

and all its rites for worshipping God in the Temple at Jerusalem, as 

well as in this your rival temple on Garizim. For throughout the 

wnole world Christian churches shall be built, in which God shall

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxI_Y2wN9n8mzDACENDai_iKMs-ozbFcbLN8228qrIuR7Xx6Mzrl2LOlbZJYbKnmSDzxknrGZxfGzR-Y2oR5Fwgr41K_5_UGJDKNmlhn245uiOtJKyb8juBb-uTx24zX_fzOQqwgg=w615-h900-v0

7cff42d7-dba7-4db4-a4ab-4fe7aaaadcbd

144 S- JOHN, C. IV. 

be worshipped in spirit and in truth. This is what Malachi pre-

dicted under the reign of Christ (i. 10, u). 

The Hebrew for the pure or clean oblation is mincha, sc, the 

Eucharist, or the oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ, which 

alone has succeeded to all the ancient sacrifices of animals. 

Ver. 22.— Ye worship what (Arabic, whom) ye know not, &c. 

Here Christ gives a direct answer to the woman, and decides the 

Jews to be in the right in the controversy concerning the worship of 

God, condemning the Samaritans as schismatics. He says, You, O 

ye Samaritans, worship ye know not what, because ye worship God 

together with your Assyrian idols ; and associating God as it were 

with idols, ye worship a false or fictitious God. Again the Samaritans 

had their own heresies and errors, which S. Epiphanius recapitulates. 

In the same manner the Turks and Jews worship a God whom 

they know not, because they deny Him to be in a Trinity of Persons. 

So also Calvin with his followers, in denying the omnipotence of 

God, and making Him cruel in condemning some men to hell without 

any demerit on their part, worship not a true, but a false God. 

For the true God is Almighty, and most kind. 

2. and better. Ye worship, i.e., ye have a method of worship and 

sacrifice which ye do not know to have proceeded from God. For 

ye have framed it out of your own imagination, contrary to the will 

and law of God. But we Jews know what we worship, because 

we follow the way of worshipping God which was prescribed by 

Moses. 

For salvation, &c. Both because I, Christ, who am the Author 

of salvation, am not born of the Samaritans, but of the Jews, as 

well as because the true knowledge and worship of God, which leads 

men to salvation, formerly emanated from the Jews to the Gentiles, 

and now in the New Law will emanate from Me, a Jew, to all 

nations. 

Ver. 23. 

 

But the hour cometh, &c. Now is the time of the 

New Law of My Gospel, in which the true worshippers, namely, 

Christians, whether Jews, or Samaritans, or of other nations, being

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz3AvXrUgYLeaNmNmbcLNvf6CTeWFq0E2UwqSABZAliWqW-Jxs1oEF0vESs_hheCbfoZnBd3hW0iwkc0MhZzeCyDKok116QjQ3ioV9BXdwB5w3r-Iwf_u9UmPDWcoZCAIfSGaN3og=w615-h900-v0

e17a8031-1e91-44e7-bc6b-759c66959b2d

SPIRITUAL WORSHIP. 14$ 

converted unto Me, shall worship God, not in this mountain, nor 

Jerusalem only, by the carnal sacrifices of beasts, as the Jews and 

Samaritans do, but in all places throughout the world in spirit and 

in truth. 

In spirit and truth. Observe, the Samaritans ignorantly and 

falsely worshipped God. But the Jews worshipped the true God 

indeed, but chiefly by corporeal victims, and other bodily symbols, 

and in one stated place, Jerusalem : all which things were shadows 

and types of the spiritual worship which was to be inaugurated by 

Christ. To both these Christ opposes His faithful Christians, who 

instead of the body, worship God in spirit ; and in truth instead of 

in falsity, shadows and ignorance. For God is an incorporeal Spirit, 

most true, and most pure. Spirit therefore here signifies the spiri-

tual worship of faith, hope, and charity, devotion, contrition, and 

other virtues, by which God is most rightly worshipped by Chris-

tians, and not through shadows and figures, but in truth. In truth 

therefore is in the true, sincere, and worthy worship of God, in 

which God is well pleased, according to the words (Ps. 1. 18), " In 

holocausts Thou shalt not be delighted : the sacrifice for God is a 

broken spirit" (Vulg.). Also (Ps. xlix. 23), "The sacrifice of praise 

shall honour Me" (Vulg.). And (Ps. iv. 6), "Sacrifice the sacrifice 

of justice, and trust in the Lord." 

As Theophylact says, " Because many seem to worship in soul, 

but have not right knowledge, such as heretics, therefore He added, 

and in truth. For it behoves us both to worship God with the 

mind, and also to have a sound faith with regard to Him. Such a 

worshipper was Paul, as Origen says, when he declares, 'God is 

my witness, whom I serve ' (Greek, w Xargiiiu, i.e., worship with 

/atria) in my spirit (Rom. i. 9)." And the Gloss says, not in 

the Temple, not in the mountain, but in the innermost temple of 

the heart, and with a true knowledge must God be worshipped. 

The Samaritan therefore worshipped God in a mountain, or locally, 

the Jew in a shadow, or figuratively, the Christian in spirit and in 

truth, truly and spiritually. For, as S. Chrysostom says, "The 

former things were figures, now all is truth." 

Vol.. iv. K

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx8RJmd6JAecStRjfq-eie0g8yx-vO3DHQob_B-Nfae0VHTQ9zB0hUinPi8RHXwWYKOerNC6GcedfmsS952seNvGtK-TBfuAfuo0duGunQWwSddVKtSUz34FNQjA8SYVFeT2dxEKA=w615-h900-v0

646a4562-e263-487c-acb8-aa1a4a74b44b

I46 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

Others explain thus, we must worship God in spirit, i.e., by the 

Spirit, or the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. 

"Mystically, by the spirit is intended," says Theophylact, " action : 

by truth, contemplation." For all Christians serve God either by an 

active, or a contemplative life. 

Heretics object, since God should be worshipped by Christians 

in spirit and in truth, therefore all corporal rites and ceremonies 

ought to be rejected in baptism. 

I answer by denying the consequence. For these are not 

shadows and figures of the Old Law, but ornaments, incentives, 

and effects of the Spirit, and therefore pertain to the Spirit. For 

without sacraments and sacrifices the Church cannot exist, because 

without them she would cease to be visible, and could not be 

united and gathered together. In form these ceremonies are 

practised by Christians, and flow from the inward spirit of faith, 

hope, and charity. Therefore they belong to the Spirit, as results 

depend upon a cause, and external upon interior actions. It was 

otherwise with the ignorant and carnal Jews, who placed all their 

worship in external sacrifices and rites. So SS. Cyril and Ambrose, 

(De Sp. Sc. I. 3. c. 12). 

Even the heathen saw that God, to be worshipped acceptably, 

must be worshipped in spirit and in truth. 

" If God be Mind, as ancient verses tell, 

Who worship Him in spirit, worship well." 

God is a Spirit, &c. This is the reason a priori : God is a most 

pure and true Spirit, therefore He is pleased only with worship in 

spirit and in truth. " If God were a body," says S. Augustine, " it 

would be fitting to worship Him in a mountain, because a mountain 

is material. Hence it is plain against the Anthropomorphites, and 

against Tertullian and Lactantius, that God has not a body, even 

the least material conceivable, but that He is a most immaterial 

Spirit." That axiom therefore of Tertullian is false, " that what is 

incorporeal is non-existent." However, Tertullian and Lactantius 

seem to use the words body and corporeal in an improper sense, 

merely to denote an actual substance.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxczcjmLsxpYpfMIdHumuVXO1oJsd5YvdqgEjhPkChU-FignSIY9x9S7gHw28_yyOLhJ0emM3-tBIY0IjD0aUkJjA0o6PZkh5Wi0SystjEooxXRzraIhcJqp6IgDaz4iBVs2jkhig=w615-h900-v0

37fec2a4-1752-4727-b1e2-209f8b6b1bc3

ON THE NATURE OF GOD. 147 

Listen to S. Augustine expounding these words of Christ (lib. De 

Spec. c. 1). "God is a Spirit incomprehensible, incorporeal, immu-

table, that cannot be bounded by space, everywhere whole, no-

where divided : everywhere present, ineffably penetrating all things, 

containing all things, knowing all things, beholding all things; 

Almighty, governing all things : wholly in heaven, wholly in earth, 

wholly everywhere. Always working, always resting, gathering, but 

needing not, carrying all things without being burdened, filling all 

things, but not included in them, creating and protecting, nourish-

ing and perfecting all things. Thou seekest, but Thou never 

wantest anything. Loving, but not inflamed. Thou art jealous, 

but untroubled. Thou repentest without grieving. Thou art angry, 

and tranquil all the while. Thou changest Thy works, but Thy 

counsel knows no alteration. Thou holdest all things, fillest all 

things, embracest all things, art above all things, sustainest all 

things. Nor dost Thou in one part sustain, and in another super-

exceed: nor in one part dost Thou fill, and in another include. 

In sustaining Thou super-exceedest, and in super-exceeding Thou 

sustainest. Thou teachest the hearts of the faithful without the 

service of words, ' reaching from one end to another mightily, and 

sweetly disposing all things. ' 

" 

What is God? Listen to Arnobius invoking Him (lib. 1, Cont. 

Gent.). " O greatest and highest Creator of things invisible : Thou 

art invisible, and art never comprehended by any other natures. 

Worthy, indeed worthy art Thou, if only Thou mayest be called 

worthy by mortal lips, after whom all intelligent nature aspires, and 

to whom it never ceases to give thanks : to whom every living thing 

ought continually to bend the knee, and supplicate with unceasing 

prayers. For Thou art the First Cause : the locality and space of 

things : the foundation of whatsoever is infinite, unborn, immortal, 

eternal, the Only One, whom no corporeal form outlines, no circum-

scription bounds, without quality or size, without situation, motion, 

or hold : concerning whom nothing can be said or expressed by 

mortal words : and that Thou mayest be understood, we must be

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyzBiAf_Zy_ujXa2fkGErWBmGXR3eyoMfEh3dM2f_ImLThT8cfZ6vk9hESSRTZ4XKBVOQ7DM3Zpdzr11A3qRZ09fXD8d-CK8tPBAYoPGkrV7qWFGIGrOvEM3jgB9xzEhSVQqfx_fA=w615-h900-v0

0c722d05-cdb3-4d95-89a0-57b0bf03faab

f48 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

silent ; and that as in a shadow a fallible look may seek after Thee, 

nothing whatsoever must be muttered." 

Ver. 25.— The woman saith, &c. Cometh, Greek, ??xira'> present 

tense, is come, who will presently solve all things that are doubtful to 

us in religion, and will teach us where, when, and how God is to be 

worshipped. The woman knew this by common speech and report. 

For already the sceptre had been transferred from Judah to Herod, 

and Daniel's seventy weeks were fulfilled, so that all men knew that 

the time for the Advent of Messiah was close at hand. The Jews 

thought that John the Baptist was Messiah : but he himself attested 

that Jesus was Messiah. Wherefore through this assertion of the 

Baptist the report was widely diffused that Messiah had come. 

Who is called Christ. These are not the words of the woman, 

who spake only in the Hebrew or Syrian language, but of the 

Evangelist interpreting the Hebrew word Messiah, by Christ, the 

Anointed One. 

Ver. 26.—Jesus saith, &c. " I am the Messias, or the Christ. 

Have faith in Me : receive My doctrine and my law, that thou mayest 

be saved and blessed." Christ both spoke this with the outward 

voice, but still more with an inward voice, illuminating the woman's 

mind, and kindling her will, to love and reverence Him. Whereon 

the woman believed straightway, and moved her whole city to 

believe in Him. 

Ver. 27. 

 

And immediately, &c. Origen, S. Cyril, and others, 

think it is meant that the disciples marvelled at the humility of 

Christ that He should condescend to talk with a poor and foreign 

woman. But if so, the Evangelist would have written, that He should 

talk with such a woman. Wherefore S. Cyprian {Tract, de Sing. 

Clericorum) and others better explain thus ;—that Christ was not 

accustomed to talk with women alone, and with this end in view, 

that He might give an example of chastity and prudence to all the 

faithful, but especially to clerics, priests, preachers, and religious. 

For rightly says the wise man, <; A moth proceedeth from a garment, 

and so doth the iniquity of man from the woman " (Ecclus. xlii. 13)

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzzhP79Z9B5R5MScPSbVYRmhYshlApEwcDhes8A_xVV6tTnFb2n7tmMDWvgFnP2dIZOrwHUjle_ZRrd-jRSb_aom4za-dRsyFoHMz5HVcu3xeObtkfL-k8blcrDGcAxhI9mBsNQTg=w615-h900-v0

510f0dde-dfef-4951-aeaa-21ce012ad00c

THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA PREACHES CHRIST. 149 

Hence Eliseus and all the saints most carefully avoided converse 

with women. It was their common opinion that women can be 

approached with but little profit, and with great peril, either to the 

woman or the man—peril of chastity, or at the least, of reputation. 

You will say—Are then women to be neglected ? I answer, By 

no means : but let them be taught in public preaching, or catechis-

ing. If they are sick, or there be any other reason why the priest 

should come to them, let it be in an open place, acting as Christ 

here did : and let a witness be present, as S. Charles Borromeo took 

care should always be in his own case. 

Ver. 28. 

 

She left, &c. " Having heard Him say," saith S. Augus-

tine, "' f am He that talketh with thee,' and having received the Lord 

Christ into her heart, what could she do but leave her pitcher, and 

run to preach the Gospel ? " For she knew that Jesus must be a 

Prophet because He had revealed to her the secrets of her heart. 

When therefore He declared that He was Messias, she believed in 

Him, knowing that He was a man worthy of credit, who could 

neither deceive, nor be deceived. Wherefore she ran into the city 

without delay, fearing lest Jesus might go away if she tarried. As 

S. Chrysostom says, " She had come to draw water, but as soon as 

she found the true Fountain she despised the other ; and by the 

grace which came down upon her from above, she discharges the 

office of an Apostle." 

For this is the Spirit of Christ, to infuse into those whom He converts zeal for converting others, that they may make others 

partakers of that great benefit which they feel in themselves. 

Elegantly and piously does S. Ambrose write of this (Serm. 30) : 

"By a new kind of marvel, the woman, who came to the well of 

Samaria a harlot, went away chaste from the fountain of Christ. 

And she who came to fetch water carried back modesty. For as 

soon as the Lord showed her her sins, she knew and confessed 

them 

: 

she announced Christ to be the Saviour. And leaving her 

water-pot at the well, she does not carry a pitcher back to the city, 

but she brings grace. She seems to return without a load, but she 

goes back full of sanctity. She returned full, I say, because she

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyUFdq6WXjlYUpi4Tj3fgOvEdBs1SUyGLXx98bHd72aNe_7vkl6SbRVOvoVBLDLJTd3n-jKwT7lzqSz7aqnS6NH0KYUzR40AwmtUk-Hg0Wzvoi6PCWbev7Z_dOZVDHIZw3oVOW9nw=w615-h900-v0

ca9a19d8-712f-4bf2-a8fc-fb9a0638d224

150 S. JOHN, C. IV. 

came a sinner, she returns a preacher. And she who had left her 

water-pot carried back the fulness of Christ. She brought back no 

harm to her city, for though, it is true, she carried no water to it, 

she brought them the whole well of salvation." 

Ver. 29. 

 

Come and see, &c. Saith Cyril, "Giving an account 

of the miracle, she prepared her hearers to believe : 

" because 

although, as S. Chrysostom says, she had not heard the whole 

history of her life from Christ, from what she did hear she believed 

(He knew) the rest. 

Is not this the Christ'? "She speaks as though hesitating, that 

they might give their opinion," said Euthymius. For she herself 

had no doubt, but firmly believed Jesus to be the Messiah. As 

S. Chrysostom says, " Observe the immense wisdom of this woman : 

she neither affirms nor denies that He is the Christ. She did not 

wish that she should be the author of their believing in Him. She 

wished them to be persuaded by hearing Him for themselves, 

which persuasion would be far more likely to happen in that way. 

For without doubt she understood that if they once tasted of that 

Fountain, they would have the same opinion about it that she had." 

This Samaritan woman then, by the conversation and grace of 

Christ, from a sinner became a penitent and a saint, yea a preacher 

of Christ like Mary Magdalen. 

Her proper name was Photina, who is reckoned among the 

Saints in the Roman Martyrology on the 20th of March, in the 

words following : " On the same day Saint Photina, the Samaritan 

woman, her sons, Joseph and Victor : also Sebastian, a general, 

Anatolius, Photius, &c., brothers, who all confessed Christ and 

obtained martyrdom." On which Baronius says, "The Greek 

Menology assigns this day for her commemoration." Her head is 

religiously preserved at Rome, in the basilica of S. Paul, where I 

have seen it amongst other relics of the saints. 

Ver. 30. They ivent out, &c. And from what they saw of the 

wisdom and holiness of His words and manners, they believed in 

Him as the Messiah, as is plain from verse 42. "The hardness 

of the Jews," says Cyril, " is reproved by the readiness to believe

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyuMoetriIdCMzcphJZk6ah8136cCFWXrEDx5CPGnAq_ioYu8hdom4RIn8AthvjlYo2X6OQv750ZdOKt4eMfOWthjcTIgcGPlKPU08J48Jc9Mdu_uZMMX6mBcdZgkVw7-BCPKhGsQ=w615-h900-v0

aca8bb17-9caf-4a8f-8e3a-4495711bcc58

HUNGER FOR SOULS. 151 

of the Samaritans." For the Samaritans were converted by one 

conversation of Christ, but the Jews after three years of His preach-

ing, and after all the many miracles which He had wrought, would 

not believe. 

Ver. 31. 

 

In the meanwhile, &c. "This," says S. Chrysostom, 

"they did out of love and zeal for their Master, seeing Him 

wearied with the heat and the journey." At the same time they 

were thinking about themselves. Hungry and tired as they were, 

they wished to eat, but did not venture to do so until Christ 

should commence, and bless the meal, as was His wont. "Jesus 

was accustomed," says Theophylact, "to accept the gift of food 

when offered, though He giveth food to all flesh. This He did, 

that they who presented it might gain merit, and that no one 

might be ashamed to be poor, nor think it hard to be fed by 

others." For it is fitting that Teachers should have other persons 

to provide food for them, that they themselves having no other 

cares may be careful only about the ministry of the word. 

Ver. 32. But He said, &c. " I am hungering for the conversion 

of the Samaritans, which I am procuring through the woman. So 

that spiritual hunger diminishes and keeps down, if it does not 

take away, all hunger for bodily food : meanwhile you who are 

tired and famished, eat as much as you please." " More obscurely 

He intimates," says S. Cyril, "that if the disciples knew of the 

conversion of the Samaritans, which was then going on, they 

would be thinking of that food, rather than be taking thought for 

corporal food. For since they were to be the future Teachers of 

the world, He teaches them by His own example that they ought to 

have far more care for the salvation of men than for their own 

bodies." 

Ver. 33. Then said His disciples, &c. The Apostles did not 

understand that Christ was speaking of spiritual food. Where-

fore S. Augustine says, "What wonder was it if the woman did 

not understand about the water? behold, the disciples do not 

understand the food." 

Ver. 34.—Jesus saith, &c. Christ here calls the work of preach-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwrYxeIBsmm9qCCDn1Hbtwa9l1_yvuCBUWvxlAusvSTyemhgZo5Vvis2uVdQVNtd7CbF3NqkhUujOSFOP_okfDEcPOgA5aQ4ooXhcrgjKmuSvILiNKXkbaFuWGMf0BnfRUx0aFE=w615-h900-v0

7a723d95-be59-4475-879f-3909fcbc3db5

152 S. JOHN, C. IV 

ing, and man's redemption, His, that is, His own special and 

sweetest food, because by it, as by the greatest dainties, He was fed 

and delighted. So Euthymius says, "The will of the Father, who 

had sent Him, and His work enjoined upon Christ, is the salvation 

of men, according to the words, I have finished the work which Thou 

gavest me to do. 

 

Tropologically, let Christians, and specially preachers, learn from 

Christ that their spiritual food ought to be obedience and zeal for 

souls, i. Because both sustain the life of the soul. 2. Because 

both, like food, cause the powers of the mind to become strong. 

3. Because as food causes a child to grow up to be a perfect man, 

so do these two virtues make us to grow to a virile state of spiritual 

strength. 

Ver. 35. 

 

Say not ye, &c. From the metaphor of food He passes 

to the allegorical harvest, from which are food and bread. 

Say not ye ? That is, ye are wont often to say. From this it 

would appear that the Apostles, as they passed through the corn-

fields of the Sichemites, talked among themselves about the coming 

harvest, as men are wont to do. From hence Christ took occasion 

to speak about the spiritual harvest, i.e., the conversion of the 

Samaritans. As though He had said, "The care of the natural 

harvest interests you : but the care of the spiritual harvest ought to 

concern you far more, that you should help Me in converting the 

Samaritans." 

Yetfour months. Maldonatus thinks this was a proverb, meaning 

that there was time enough for thinking about any matter—as the 

natural harvest, for instance : but that it could not be used of 

the spiritual harvest ; for that indeed was already ripe for being 

reaped by Christ and the Apostles. For Maldonatus thinks this 

was spoken by Christ about the end of March, when the harvest is 

not far off. 

S. Augustine and others take the words as they stand, literally. 

Wherefore these words would seem to have been spoken by Christ 

in the month of January, after the eight months in which He had 

preached in Judea. For in four months from January, or in May,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxbusKS6jHQo6GvncN7-wYSjyM4fJSd0FU1-WE3aThTtLuONxclzgn07ZkUWKfC6a2gKd8HHrd7fXN0GJAFpRBner9Ge4mGTTk6pXD72u6IDSwcmFPjpJErFuWlf3QHM5W32OmWEg=w615-h900-v0

3005c648-7746-417d-b24a-36c13eaf37b2

THE SPIRITUAL HARVEST. 1 53 

the crops are ripe, and the harvest comes. Wherefore at Pentecost, 

which fell in May, they offered to God the loaves of the first fruits 

of the new harvest. "Ye," says S. Augustine, "are counting four 

months unto harvest. I show you another harvest, white and pre-

pared already." So He says, Lift up your eyes, and look unto the 

fields that they are white already unto the harvest. The white fields 

He calls the city of Sichem, and the places round about, which, 

stirred up by the woman, bring hearers in troops to Christ. As though 

He had said, " Ye see these fields, filled not with wheat, but with 

a multitude of people flocking to Me, who are prepared to receive 

My doctrine, and to be admitted into My Church. Labour then 

strenuously with Me, O My Apostles, to reap the harvest. The 

wheat harvest may be four months distant yet : but the harvest of 

souls is nigh, yea ready, amongst these Samaritans. It is fitting 

then that you and I should reap them, and gather them into the 

garner of God." Theophylact says, " Lift up both your bodily and 

your spiritual eyes, and see the multitude of the Samaritans. See 

their minds eager to believe, which, like fields that are ripe for 

salvation, have need of reapers." 

Ver. 36. 

 

And he that reapeth, &c. Christ invites the Apostles 

to labour with Him in gathering in this harvest, by the hope of an 

eternal reward. As though He said, " He that reaps wheat receives 

wages, but only brief and temporal : but he that reaps with Me this 

spiritual harvest of souls gathers it unto life eternal. For this 

harvest the reaper gains both for himself and for his crop, that is, 

for the souls whom he converts, for he leads them to heaven as it 

were in triumph." " The fruit of this terrestrial harvest," says S. 

Chrysostom, "does not arrive at eternal life, but that spiritual 

harvest always accompanies us." Christ calls Moses and the 

Prophets sowers, who with great labour delivered the seeds of faith 

to the Jews, i.e., such first principles as that God is One, and that 

the Messiah would come for the salvation of the world. The 

reapers are Christ and His Apostles, who, by the teaching of the 

Gospel, perfected these first principles of the Prophets, and by the 

faith and grace of Christ sanctified both Jews and Samaritans, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzr5YgFWc68UAjG-Il9UPBnPpc89UFW5pe0xfNUSn6yrhVyNvP5oFsYh_7bkLLWFrmmno7MHtcR2ujoP6QJIgkRXLNjEtGeG4rNJGKJcjs5ThI0RQRlpQHsPhMo7ixWyaaoQPf6=w615-h900-v0

0402201b-3347-4c9e-af45-b3c8cdddd4b6

154 s - JOHN, C. IV. 

brought them to eternal life. Wherefore this conversion of the 

Samaritans brought joy, not only to Christ and the Apostles, but 

to Moses and the Prophets, because their seed had not proved 

unfruitful, but had been brought by Christ to an abundant harvest. 

As S. Augustine says, " If the Prophets had not been sowers, whence 

had it come to that woman to say, I know that Messiah cometh ? 

That woman was already ripe fruit." And again, "They had 

different labours in time, but they shall have an equal fruition of 

joy, when they together receive the wages of everlasting life." It 

is often very different in the natural harvest, where the reaper 

rejoices, but the sower sorrows. 

Ver. 37. 

 

For in this, &c. A word, i.e., a proverb, which is 

" current in the mouths of many," says S. Chrysostom. This pro-

verb, one soweth, &c, which is spoken of the natural harvest, is still 

more true with regard to the spiritual sowers and reapers. " The 

sowers were the Prophets, the reapers are you, O ye Apostles, who 

by My doctrine will bring to perfection the seeds of faith which 

were sown by the Prophets, and will gather them, when ripe, 

into the storehouse of the Church." Wherefore He subjoins an 

explanation. 

Ver. 38. I have sent, &c. I have sent, i.e., I have desired and 

determined to send. An inchoate and destined, not a completed, 

action is signified. The Prophets, and teachers of the Law, and 

such as they, with great toil taught the uninstructed minds of the 

Jews the rudiments oi the knowledge of God, and prepared them 

for the Christian harvest of righteousness and holiness. You, O ye 

Apostles, have entered into their labours, because ye shall convert the 

minds of the Jews prepared to receive Me. 

Moreover Christ said this, that by the example of the Prophets, 

who sowed so laboriously, He might animate the Apostles to preach 

the gospel, which was more easy, and involved less toil. " Lest," 

as S. Chrysostom says, " they should be troubled as about to 

undergo the greatest burden, when they were sent to preach. 

They must think that the Prophets had had yet harder labour, even 

as sowing the seed is harder labour, and needs greater anxiety

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzyXdVYzPNotnCZD5ppSMHumxlUkkWp5ALHA2WSVzJMW3EGpNo2FwSnkAVlL0T2mFuOgfBm6WYSjlT77_paLKhAqe0kZ7KORI5zb-ynfj11NajyoCqnr4JRfdB0VtaTc18WLmwg=w615-h900-v0

a1e0b31a-c658-4ad4-8000-a70dc5a368a2

FAITH OF THE SAMARITANS. 1 55 

than reaping. As the Gloss says, "Unless the Jews had been 

prepared by the Prophets, they would not have listened to the 

Apostles." 

Ver . 39. 

 

Of that city many believed, &c. They were moved 

because she confessed before her fellow-citizens that she had 

lived in fornication with a man not her husband, as Christ had 

told her, that by means of her own shame she might make known 

the honour and glory of Christ, the true Prophet and Messiah. 

Ver. 40. He abode there two days : not longer, lest, if He abode 

longer among Samaritans, the Jews should calumniate Him, as 

not being the Messiah, who was promised to the Jews, rather 

than to the Samaritans. 

Ver. 42. And said to the woman, &c. Saviour of the world, 

understand Messiah, as the Syriac Version adds, who was sent by 

God for the salvation not of Israel only, as the Jews pretended, 

but of all the nations of the whole world. Of the world I say, 

lost by sin. Deservedly does S. Chrysostom in this place admire 

the, as it were, sudden faith of the Samaritans, when the Jews 

were so dilatory and hard to believe in Christ. 

Ver. 43. After two days, &c. That is, He went into other cities 

and villages of Galilee, leaving out Nazareth, His own city, as S. 

Matthew says (iv. 13). 

Ver. 44. For Jesus, &c. The word for expresses the reason 

why Jesus left Nazareth, His own city, and went into the other 

parts of Galilee, because the Nazarenes despised Him as their 

fellow-citizen, and the son of an artizan. 

Ver. 45.— When therefore He was come, &c. All the miracles, 

especially that He alone had cast out all the buyers and sellers 

from the Temple, as well as the many other signs that He had 

shown. 

Observe : The Jews, after the many miracles of Christ which 

they saw, did not believe in His preaching, nor even receive Him. 

The Galileans, who also saw many miracles, received Him kindly 

but did not believe in Him. But the Samaritans, although they 

saw no miracles, received Him, and believed Him to be the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyS6tx93HxUZViRT5irSQFQh8rMIsTPGPZtaaqkQEH1AwQXm-Zorzm1KvrlKuly8eRK6hCb7NNgRL1ZuDVBF1peTVS6Y8iORUGjvGP0fKpdd79idM3coAYTlXN3qzxOosBc5Y6Z=w615-h900-v0

44e4883b-b705-4a81-8fe5-75c8f9146c72

156 S. JOHN, c. IV. 

Messiah, sent by God for the salvation of the whole world. So 

those who are without, often receive what those of the household 

disdain and despise. 

Ver. 46. 

 

A certain nobleman. The Latin translator seems to 

have had in his Greek copies /3atf/X;<rxo£, i.e., regulus, a little 

king. The present reading is /3a<r;X/*o?, i.e., royal, understand 

counsellor, or public minister, of Herod Antipas ; a. prefect, or intimate 

friend of his. The Syriac has, a royal servant S. Chrysostom 

says, "because he was of the royal race, or discharged some 

princely function." Nonnus says, "he was a courtier, who was 

over the army." Origen says, " he was perhaps of the family of 

Tiberius Caesar, employed by him in some office of Judea." 

Capharnaum: it is probable that this nobleman's son lay ill at 

Capharnaum, because it was his father's usual place of abode. 

And his father, hearing that Jesus, who healed so many sick, was 

come out of Judea into Cana of Galilee, went thither, to ask of 

Jesus the healing of his son ; as is plain from what follows. The 

nobleman seems to have been a Jew, not a Gentile, as both S. 

Jerome and Origen think. We may think so, because he had 

little faith, and for that reason was reproved by Christ ; whereas 

the Gentiles were prompt to believe, and so were praised by Him, 

as was the case with the centurion, and the woman of Canaan. 

Some, as Irenaeus, think that this nobleman was the same 

person as the centurion mentioned in Matthew viii. But they were 

different persons. For the centurion, when Christ was willing to go 

to him, asked him to remain where he was. But this nobleman 

asks Christ to come to his sick son. The former came to Christ 

as He was descending from the mountain to Capharnaum. The 

nobleman comes to Jesus as He is going into Cana. The boy of 

the former was sick with palsy ; this one's child was ill with a 

fever. Christ was all but present when He healed the former : this 

He healed being absent. The one was a servant, the other a son. 

So S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others. 

Ver. 47.— When he had heard, &c. The nobleman having heard 

the fame of Christ, that He healed all siek persons whatsoever, pro-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxBcOqHp7ADRp_i2MNT10tlE1aWDCDyCDwWiSzikeou-Z3LFfXGvkbuCydNtB1GndLBA5_euL9GrBUrZusanjfyudbVDQ1_9anZrPASqVVIHb9FQ1Gw0XjeWeA3COYbepkvfr7i=w615-h900-v0

0fbdd2ff-fff7-4f62-aae8-647f04486ada

SIGNS AND PRODIGIES. 157 

ceeded from Capharnaum to Cana, to ask Jesus, who was staying 

there, to come back with him to Capharnaum, to heal his son. 

This was a journey of fourteen hours, or leagues, and therefore long 

and difficult. Wherefore he had little faith in Jesus, says S. Gregory, 

since he did not think He could save unless He were corporeally 

present. 

Ver. 48.—Jesus therefore, &c. Signs and prodigies mean nearly 

the same thing. Signs, however, are properly what take place in 

natural things, and by nature, slowly operating, but which Christ 

wrought in a moment, and therefore miraculously. Such are the 

healing of the sick. But prodigies are things which surpass the 

whole power of nature, as the raising of the dead. 

Christ reproved the small faith of the nobleman, in order that 

He might sharpen and augment it. As though He said, " Thou and 

thine hast heard of certain signs and prodigies which I have 

wrought; still thou believest not that I am the Messiah, unless I 

do very many more, and that thou thyself mayest behold them with 

thine eyes." " He teaches," says S. Chrysostom, " that it is not His 

miracles that we are to attend to, but His doctrine. He shows that 

signs are especially made gracious to the soul ; and in this case He 

heals the father who was labouring under a disease of the mind, no 

less than the (bodily) disease of the son." Indeed, He first cures 

the unbelief, or the imperfection of faith, in the father, and then the 

fever of the son. 

Ver. 49. 

 

The ruler saith, &c. My child, Greek, itaibm fiou, 

i.e., my little son, meaning, my most beloved, my only delight. " The 

ruler," says S. Chrysostom, " being distressed by his son's affliction, 

did not pay much attention then to the words of Jesus, but was 

wholly taken up with the cure. See how he grovels on the earth 

 

Come down, ere my child die—as if Jesus could not raise the dead, 

or knew not that he had a son." 

Ver. $0.—Jesus saith, &c. "This one word," saith Rupert, "was 

a true declaration concerning things present, and a command of 

life." For this word of Christ was not only declaratory, but effec-

tual : for it produced that which it declared, namely, the life and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwZ7SUaOMxVMdDerDEQvrh_uurcLUr9zRFT1xgHDeCJZtAt-ZumWvbQE6utOQgl0zwGvIBX09ia3cQ1uJMA1-LFllU7-y3FJWrtel1WTJdNAkE9rpdHyLstb-dfc3qvIW8aGOcRcg=w615-h900-v0

ce08348b-e3ee-47d3-9b84-b14589ead6f3

158 S. JOHN, c. IV. 

healing of the sick. So in the Eucharist, the words, This is My 

Body, enunciate in such manner that the Body of Christ is there, 

that they cause It to be there present. 

Moreover, Christ went to the servant of the centurion : He was 

not willing to go to the son of the ruler, because there was in the 

centurion confirmed faith, but in the ruler faith was imperfect. 

He believed the word which Jesus spake. " The Saviour cured two 

persons," says Cyril, "by the same words. He brought the mind 

of the ruler to believe, and He delivered the youth from bodily 

disease." 

Ver. 51. 

 

As he was going, &c. "His servants met him," says 

Cyril, "telling of the swiftness and power of the words of Christ, the 

Lord so ordering that by the sequence of events the faith of the 

ruler might be confirmed." 

Ver. 52. He asked therefore, &c. "He studies to be informed 

concerning the hour," says Cyril, "to see if it coincides with the 

time wherirthe Saviour's favour was bestowed upon him." 

Yesterday, at the seventh hour : this was an hour after noon, when, 

the child being healed, the servants had immediately set out to tell 

the glad news to the father. But they could not reach him on the 

same day. They travelled therefore the rest of that day, and all 

through the night, and came to him the next morning, for, as 

we have said, Capharnaum was fourteen leagues or hours distant 

from Cana. 

Ver. 53. The father therefore knew. " From hence we may 

understand," says Bede (in Catena), "that there are degrees of faith, 

as well as of other virtues. There is the beginning, the increase, 

and the perfection of faith. This man's faith had its beginning 

when he asked for his son's safety : its increase when he believed 

the word of the Lord saying, Thy son liveth : it was perfected by the 

announcement of his servants." 

Moreover, because this nobleman dwelt at Capharnaum, as well 

as the centurion, we need not doubt that they were friends ; and 

that the centurion through this miracle, which was prior in point of 

time, conceived so great faith in Christ that he said, " Lord, I am

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzuGBhnfS6Uz-3vrT0-OLF5KEo-S6jAWbVPGzm34mIKsHizK09_5kQcHsmeM3nNRRun7l2zsjz-cHZpmjuqzuB4SQyPhhj_qIwUFKFMkoygfHO8O_D_mVf5RqdcKboW5jUrDbbM4g=w615-h900-v0

ab01edfb-dfbb-4d08-ae9d-e1ba2159dd5d

THE HOUR OF HEALING. 1 59 

not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my roof, but speak the 

word only, and my servant shall be healed" (Matt. viii. 8). 

Tropologically, listen to Theophylact, "The little king (regulus) 

is every man, not only because, according to the soul, he is nigh to 

the King of all, but because he has assumed dominion over all 

things. The son is a mind fevered with depraved pleasures and 

desires. The going down of Christ is His merciful condescension. 

Christ saith, Go thy way, i.e., show continual progress in good 

things : then thy son shall live. Otherwise he will die, if thou 

ceasest to walk (aright)." 

Finally, he was healed at the seventh hour, 1. because, as Origen 

says, seven is the symbol of the Sabbath, and of rest, in which is 

health. 2. Because the same number is the symbol of the seven-

fold Holy Spirit, in Whom is all salvation. 

Ver. 54. 

 

This is again, &c. The word again must be joined 

with when He was come. Meaning, this was the second miracle 

which Christ wrought in Cana of Galilee, when agairf—that is, a 

second time—He was come thither out of Judea. For the first 

miracle was the conversion of water into wine, which Christ did, 

when He came the first time out of Judea into Galilee. He came, 

therefore, twice out of Judea into Galilee, and illustrated each of His 

comings by a new miracle. " It is called the second" says Euthy-

mius, " not because after the first He had done no other miracle in 

the whole of Palestine (for He had already done many in Judea), 

but because, after the first, this was (only) the second which He had 

done in Cana." John says this, indicating that an abundance of 

miracles were performed subsequently by Christ in Galilee, which 

Matthew relates (iv. 23, &c), and which after this are related by 

S. John.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzY4jYMzv2BXz7zGnkxvR0LwNznHUTFQAEH1-bXeNF4EW3-pzDfgALrvtLZvuDl_7cc-4MMhvg_nYEqqlDeRDDGXATCmBIe6xya4O0VJyk45XcE29oscF_a39O4VbH4ruTSlqrmvQ=w615-h900-v0

cbe14595-59c9-48d4-ab42-b47f6872d5a3

( i6o 

) 

CHAPTER V. 

I fesus on the sabbath day currfh him that was diseased eight and thirty years. 

10 TheJews therefore cavil, and persecute Him for it. 17 He answereth for 

Himself, and reproveth them, shewing by the testimony of His Father, 32 of 

John, 36 ofHis works, 39 and ofthe Scriptures, who He is. 

AFTER this there was a feast of the Jews ; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 

- 2 Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is called 

in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches. 

3 In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, 

waiting for the moving of the water. 

4 For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the 

water : whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made 

whole of whatsoever disease he had. 

5 And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. 

6 When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that 

case, he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole ? 

7 The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is 

troubled, to put me into the pool : but while I am coming, another steppeth 

down before me. 

8 Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk. 

9 And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and 

walked : and on the same day was the sabbath. 

10 IT The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day : 

it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. 

1 

 

He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take 

up thy bed, and walk. 

12 Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy 

bed, and walk ? 

13 And he that was healed wist not who it was : for Jesus had conveyed him-

self away, a multitude being in that place. 

14 Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou 

art made whole : sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. 

15 The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made 

him whole. 

16 And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, be-

cause he had done these things on the sabbath day. 

17 IT But Jesus answered them, My Father vvorketh hitherto, and I work. 

18 Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had 

broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal 

with God.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwQQeZQPboNkq0vNOgcQEycHvR4LlbjV6Mw9aXE8paC4RJWLOC0QnODANLTLHQd_Bu5LU_2TZYgndEfuhDFCo-b_l7Gsa8ofz4aYGF0jGfTUv4oT1BR-CMRu3XCeWIe9-3FQbpjkA=w615-h900-v0

ea4216d3-4cf7-4a3f-a33b-cb9e677ead43

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. l6l 

19 If Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, 

The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do : for whal 

things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. 

20 For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself 

doeth : and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel. 

21 For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the 

Son quickeneth whom he will. 

22 For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the 

Son ; 

23 That all mm should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He 

that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. 

24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on 

him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation ; 

but is passed from death unto life. 

25 Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the 

dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God : and they that hear shall live. 

26 For as the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have 

life in himself; 

27 And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the 

Son of man. 

28 Marvel not at this : for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the 

graves shall hear his voice, 

29 And shall come forth ; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of 

life ; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. 

30 I can of mine own self do nothing : as I hear, I judge : and my judgment is 

just ; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath 

sent me. 

31 If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. 

32 There is another that beareth witness of me ; and I know that the witness 

which he witnesseth of me is true. 

33 Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. 

34 But I receive not testimony from man : but these things I say, that ye might 

be saved. 

35 He was a burning and a shining light : and ye were willing for a season to 

rejoice in his light. 

36 But I have greater witness than that of John : for the works which the 

Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that 

the Father hath sent me. 

37 And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye 

have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. 

38 And ye have not his word abiding in you : for whom he hath sent, him ye 

believe not. 

39 Search the scriptures ; for in them ye think ye have eternal life : and they 

are they which testify of me. 

40 And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. 

41 I receive not honour from men. 

42 But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. 

43 I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not : if another shall 

come in his own name, him ye will receive. 

VOL. IV. 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzdCDbR8VdkrlGAEgGeWYD8HaMFvR3Y6XyPsnw2V-55bp5rGmPtpmcG4h4DgXkaeowe-4ATLzXYsqHcGbwQzC8BleXabrGUmRAVs5P1rKlnXiRAIwGWn8pzwyiHEV6Ysgs581fU4w=w615-h900-v0

f81d4565-5965-43b9-847a-8036e13239bf

162 S. JOHN, C V. 

44 How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the 

honour that cometh from God only? 

45 Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father : there is one that accuseth 

you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. 

46 For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me : for he wrote of me. 

47 But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? 

After these things, &c. Observe, John here omits many things 

which Christ did in Galilee, but which Matthew records from the 

4th to the 12th chapter of his Gospel. For what Matthew relates 

in his 12th chapter concerning the disciples plucking the ears of 

corn took place after the following feast, as will appear presently. 

A feast. SS. Chrysostom, Cyril, and others think that this was 

the Feast of Pentecost. With more probability, S. Irenseus (lib. 2, 

c. 39), Ruperti, and others, think it was the Passover. They 

show this (1.) Because in chap, iv., ver. 35, Jesus said there were still 

four months unto harvest. That therefore must have been before 

the Passover : thus the Passover must have been the first great 

subsequent feast. 

2. Because the Passover was the feast of feasts. When therefore 

it is said absolutely, there was a feast, the Passover, which was the 

feast par excellence, is to be understood. 

3. Because Christ after His baptism preached for three years and 

a half, according to the common consent of divines. It follows 

from this that there ought to be notices in the Gospels of four 

Passovers, which is the case. The first is mentioned by John in ii. 13 ; 

the second in this place ; the third in vi. 4 ; the fourth, just before 

His death, xix. 14. But if the feast mentioned in this 5th chapter 

were not the Passover, we could only gather the mention of three 

by S. John. 

Here then comes to a close the account of the first year and 

three months of Christ's ministry, that is to say, from January 6, 

when He was baptized, until this second Passover, which was kept 

in Nisan, or March. 

Ver. 2. 

 

Now there is sheep-market : Vulgate, Probatica. The 

pool took its name both because it was nigh the gate adjacent to 

the Temple, through which the flocks of sheep for the sacrifices

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyvIQS96GO8hfGBHG9UZGz4dhPNg5WP5F8AKx2XtNDrXoQhjKj3JK0UpUqO_P0A7FoXI_q6ymcA7gBCWejlklPwLJV-e4xWSI-MAR7ESpM8y0VaIEy61Ujmm1seb12giOCzzq24=w615-h900-v0

e3f042b5-60d8-48b5-8da6-2fb2f3dec371

THE POOL OF BETHSAIDA. 1 63 

were driven, and also because the sheep, which were offered to God 

every morning and evening in the Temple, were there gathered 

together and washed. 

A pool: i.e., a place which contained fishes, or at least might 

have held them. The Greek is xoXvttPtya, a place to swim in, 

because fishes, or even men, might swim in it. The Vulgate has 

piscina. This pool was constructed by Solomon for the service of 

the Temple; hence it is called by Josephus {Bell. Jud., vi. 6) 

Solomon's Pool. In it the Nethinims washed the victims which 

they handed over to the priests to be offered in the Temple. 

Some Greek codices instead of pool read irvXri, a porch, or gate, 

but S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Cyril, Euthymius, S. Jerome, and 

others passim, read xoXu^,S^^a, i.e., a pool. The Syriac has a bap-

tistery, ox font. 

Bethsaida: so read the Vulgate, and among the Greeks SS. 

Chrysostom and Cyril. And appositely, for Bethsaida means in 

Hebrew a house, i.e., a place of hunting, ox fishing. And this is the 

signification of the Greek xoXt^jSs^ca, a place for fish to swim in. 

The Greek MSS., however, read Bnhadu: so also S. Jerome (loc. 

Hebmis). Bethesda means in Hebrew a place of pouring forth, 

because the rain from the roofs of the houses, and streams of water 

from aqueducts, flowed into it. The Syriac has Bethchesda, or house 

of mercy, from the Hebrew IDFI, chesed, mercy, because there God showed His mercy to the miserable sick whom He healed ; or else 

because righteous men relieved with their alms the sick poor who 

lay there. 

Having five porches, or porticoes : these porches or porticoes were 

places covered above, but open below, either for walking, or taking 

rest in, that sick persons might rest in them secure from rain, or the 

heat of the sun, and immediately step out of them into the pool 

when its angel moved the water. 

Ver 

- 3-

 

In them . languishing people (Vulg.) ; Greek, uafctovruv 

; 

Eng. Ver. sickfolk; withered (Vulg.) aridorum, dry, i.e., whose arm, 

or hand, or foot, or some other limb, was lifeless. 

An angel of the Lord ,• either Raphael, or some other. Raphael, who

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhenTEqTtwU7-gjCQ98T9sJ93GKoS5PAJJsD8o7nAUbJA_-_5fXtwbP34fOyXzaJbFgmalvylFc5RoPALnjeACOcWOjAFCN5RI0xvdhDUMP0_Vu2ChGKfv3AlPTu5U4ceTh8rjwA=w615-h900-v0

8d21405b-3041-4865-8842-e3843bc945a0

164 S. JOHN, C. V. 

presides over bodily healing, is so called from the Hebrew, which 

signifies the medicine, ox physician of God. Whence he cured Tobit 

of his blindness. 

According to a time (Vulg.), i.e., at a certain time determined by 

God, or the angel, but unknown to men. Wherefore what Tertullian 

and Cyril say does not seem to be correct, that it was only once in 

the year, namely, at Pentecost, that the angel went down into the 

pool. For if so, the sick folk would not have lain beside it (for so 

long a time), but would have waited at home until Pentecost was 

close at hand. As Euthymius says, " By speaking of a stated time, 

he showed that the miracle was not continually taking place, but at 

certain times, unknown indeed to men, though often, as I think, 

in the course of the year." 

The water was moved (Vulg.) ; Greek, iragdagero i/SSo, i.e., he dis-

turbed or troubled the water. " The sound of moving signified that 

angels were present to sanctify the water," says S. Cyril. "The 

water was moved in order to show that the angel had descended," 

says S. Ambrose. 

And he thatfirst went down, &c. In order to show the value of 

labour and diligence, and that we ought to be swift and active to 

take God's benefits. Thus it was necessary for him who would 

gather the manna to rise at dawn, for when the sun was risen it 

melted, "that it might be made known unto all that it was needful 

to prevent the rising of the sun for Thy blessing, and to worship 

Thee at the dawning of the day " (Wisd. vi. 28). For God gives 

His gifts to the watchful and earnest, not to the slow and sleepy. 

Thus in the race only he who excels the rest receives the prize 

(1 Cor. ix. 24). 

You will ask why, after the troubling of the water, as it is in the 

Greek, only he who first stepped in after the troubling was healed ? 

I answer, that the literal reason was to show that this power of 

healing did not proceed from any natural virtue of the water, but 

from the moving of the angel, and the command of God. This 

moving of the angel did not impress any physical power or quality 

upon the water to heal any disease, but it was a sign of the Divine

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyvXLl4X5NW9Fq2avAQ4lftCpLdAt0Nsf9W_TN02afk4zDmZZI70cMs0PGFofwHDvJ7lpZT-g0e_i3k_qPmDi16w5m1fWlByBmYsE7s24TUh_zZX-vHvCoRICpRG01eq_pVqD3KiA=w615-h900-v0

3d6e82db-d105-4e97-9b84-7ba03a0a5f9f

SPIRITUAL MEANING OF "TROUBLING." 165 

power and working, which were about to heal that sick person who 

had previously, by his own diligence, stirred up himself, and had 

gone down into the water that he might there receive the miraculous 

blessing of God. This moving, therefore, was an invitation to the 

sick to receive healing in the troubled water. 

Appositely indeed did the angel make use of this sign of motion, 

because, whilst it was being moved, the virtue of the water became 

lively and efficacious. For life consists in motion, death in quietude 

and torpor. 

Tropologically, the reason was to signify that the sinner, when he 

is converted and healed by God, is wont to be troubled and agitated 

in his conscience by various emotions of fear, shame, and hope. 

For by these God moves a man to repentance and contrition, that 

he may thereby be healed, as the Council of Trent teaches. 

Of whatsoever disease. From hence it is plain that the healing 

virtue of this pool did not proceed from the victims which were 

washed in it, nor from wood lying at the bottom, of which the cross 

of Christ was afterwards made, as some have supposed, but was 

supernatural and miraculous. For God wished to bestow this 

benefit upon believing people about the time of Christ's coming (for 

there is no mention of it in the Old Testament), in order that 

Christ thus healing a sick man might show that He was God, who 

had given this property to the pool, and therefore that He without 

it could heal the sick. Wherefore it would seem that this gift was 

taken away from the ungrateful Jews when they killed Christ, for 

we find no subsequent mention of it. As Tertullian says {cont. 

Jud., c. 13), "The pool of Bethsaida, which, to the coming of Christ, 

healed the sicknesses of Israel, afterwards ceased from bestowing its 

benefits through their persevering fury." 

Allegorically, God willed that this pool should be a token of His 

Passion and His Baptism. For as the angel descended into the 

water, so Christ went down to His Passion and torments ; and in 

them, as in water, He was immersed and buried. And as the pool 

was red with the blood of the victims which were washed in it, so 

was Christ ruddy, and stained with His own blood (Isa. lxiii. 2), that

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzeKiMLnrPeO875N-sLr272X9nAQvnb62OdSb6EryH5LQKJG2GQj8nqJlEYK_n_wuG0lfguxT2k67M2NPoeXArgZPJcobIuGVg-FlgcqqE-NizIvR7zTm8wpnXlaIFcY8i6IzQB=w615-h900-v0

7af9c7b9-e0b2-478a-ba2b-e7caa3426765

166 S. JOHN, c. V. 

by the merit of His blood He might cause baptism (wherefore the 

Syriac here translates baptistery), in whose water believers are washed, 

to heal all spiritual infirmities. So Tertullian (de Baptismo, c. 5), 

S. Ambrose (de Spir. Sc, lib. 1, c. 7), and S. Chrysostom. The latter 

says, " For when God wished to instruct us in the belief of baptism 

now nigh at hand, He drove away not only pollutions, but diseases 

by means of water : for the nearer the images and figures were to 

the truth, they were more illustrious than the ancient figures." 

And S. Austin says, "To descend into the troubled water is humbly 

to believe in the Lord's Passion. There one was healed to signify 

unity. Whosoever came afterwards was not healed, because whoso 

is outside of unity cannot be healed." 

Ver. 5. 

 

A man having an infirmity ,• Greek and Vulgate. S. 

Chrysostom and others say that this sick man was a paralytic. 

Tropologically, this infirm man represents one who has grown old 

in a course of sin : who lies without strength in habits of vice, and 

is without any power to do good. For as palsy dissolves the bonds 

which knit the limbs together, so does a habit of sin enervate and 

dissolve the strength of the soul, so that men cannot arise out of it, 

and resist it, unless they are raised and strengthened by the mighty 

grace of God. Hence it is plain that such a palsy as this was 

naturally incurable ; and we see that for thirty-eight years it could 

not be healed by any skill. Christ therefore took upon Himself 

to heal this palsy rather than the diseases of the other sick who 

were there, in order to show forth both His Almighty power and His 

infinite mercy. This was why Christ determined to heal Paul, who 

was labouring even beyond the rest of the incredulous and impious 

Jews under the worst spiritual disease of unbelief, as he himself 

shows us in the beginning of his 1st Epistle to Timothy. As S. 

Austin says, " The great Physician descended from heaven because 

one who was sick unto death lay on the earth." On the symbolical 

meaning of the thirty-eight years see S. Augustine in loc, where he 

says, amongst other things, that it was the symbol of weakness, as 

forty is the symbol of healing and perfection. " If therefore," he 

says, " the number forty has the perfection of the Law, and the Law

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwP1Zhg3LVgvBs3RLKR4exQ9SII6wA2PYJ5cJnJ6Q5YM6GVKq8v3QrztLZq4jTGEWOyHExiMy-Y5X_205U8ShDSyJEsFPmsK_7Svh1ZwkeqB7ysrvd2MsR3XwlybxkSyqQukDxV=w615-h900-v0

7081d840-92a2-4146-be72-00b36c4d9aa3

CHRIST GIVES TO THE POOL ITS EFFICACY. 1 67 

is not fulfilled except by the twofold precept of charity, what 

wonder that he was sick, who lacked two of the forty ? " The two-

fold love, viz., of God and his neighbour, was lacking. 

Ver. 6.— When Jesus saw, &c. Christ knew well that he had a 

desire to be healed, but He asked the question— 1. To afford the 

sick man an opportunity for conversation, and from thence of being 

healed. As S. Cyril says, " Herein was a great proof of the com-

passion of Christ, that He did not (always) wait for the entreaties 

of those who were sick, but prevented them by His mercy." 

2. That He might sharpen the man's attention to the instan-

taneous character of the miracle, and so to the words and deeds of 

Christ. From all these He might know with certainty that he was 

healed, not by the pool, nor by medicine, but by Christ alone, who 

was superior to all the virtue of the pool, or of medicine, and so 

might believe in Him as a prophet, and the Messiah, and might in 

penitence ask and obtain of Him remission of his sins. Wherefore 

He healed him beside the healing pool, but without touching it, 

that He might show that it was He who had given its virtue to the 

pool, and that He therefore, without the aid of the pool, could heal 

him by His word alone. 

Ver. 7. 

 

The sick man answered, &c. The sick man does not 

answer Christ's question directly. He takes for granted that every 

one knew that he desired to be healed. Therefore he makes mention 

of the way of obtaining healing by means of the pool. As though 

he had said, " I am prevented by palsy from going into the pool, 

for I have none to carry me. I am a poor man. If therefore 

Thou canst help me in this matter, do so." For he thought that 

when Christ asked the question, Dost thou wish to be healed? He 

meant, " Dost thou wish that I should carry thee into the pool, when 

the angel moves the water, that thou mayest in it be healed ? " As 

yet he did not know the power of Jesus, for he had never seen Him. 

The Syriac translates a little differently : Even so, Lord (I do 

wish to be healed), but 1 have not a man. Beautifully does S. 

Augustine say, " In very deed was that man (Jesus) necessary for his 

salvation, but it was that man who is also God."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwTVMFQJlvX0_NYItC5p0a59tvjbxTqWUXXMcaMN-To8xEWA2fWU6kUBZITH-rSti7icT2pLwqyhhl7oGxn9qOBP3VxEGtnn3LVcZpLdJ-52BG7DLwXOeUdsSp7c9gfTTNqXZua5A=w615-h900-v0

0a50f513-a48c-47ea-95bd-92acda40f5bc

i68 s. Tohn, c. v 

Ver. 8.—-Jesus saith unto him, &c. These words of Christ were 

practical and efficacious. In saying Arise, He caused him to arise, 

and healed him. As S. Augustine says, " It was not a command of 

work, but an operation of healing." And S. Cyril, " Such power and 

virtue were not of man ; it is a property of God alone to command 

like this." Christ bade him take up his bed, that it might be 

evident to all that He had healed him, yea, that he had been made 

instantly stout and strong, so as to be able to carry his bed. 

Wherefore Euthymius in this passage observes that Christ was 

accustomed, after the miracles which He wrought, to add something 

by which their truth and greatness might be perceived. Thus 

in this instance He bade the paralytic take up his bed, which he 

could not have done unless he was healed 

; 

yea, stout and strong. 

So after the multiplication of the loaves, He ordered more fragments 

to be taken up than were originally in the bread. So He said to 

the leper whom He healed, " Go show thyself to the priest." So 

He ordered something to be given to eat to the girl whom He 

raised from the dead (Mark v. 43). 

Tropologically, S. Gregory {Horn. 12 in Ezech.) applies these 

words to sinners who have been justified by penance, who, by the 

just judgment of God, suffer temptations from their former sins. 

He says, " The sick man restored to health is bidden to carry the 

bed in which he had been carried. For it is necessary that every 

one who is healed should bear the contumely of the flesh, in which 

he had before lain in his sickness. What then is it to say, Take 

up thy bed, and go unto thine house, but, " Bear the temptations of 

the flesh, in which thou hast hitherto lain ? " 

Thus S. Mary of Egypt for seventeen years after her conver-

sion suffered dreadful temptations of the flesh, because she had 

previously lived for that number of years immodestly. Sins there-

fore are their own executioners, and their own righteous avengers. 

What before pleased afterwards torments : what willingly thou hast 

done, the same thou shalt hereafter unwillingly suffer. 

Symbolically, S. Augustine says (Tract. 17), "Arise; that is, love 

God, who is above. Take up thy bed ; i.e., love thy neighbour, bear

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx0Y6tvevtgHUyQZM900ElcGAUFjCM2iq7-NgtIu8JpbTq18IY9jAfdRISIEWPPqMoEmNqM57_e1JyosV9r_9CjnhaeIEOrYTV2lYNUPtASkXQPKAebg5QW5Gcg8hHopSLpuN6s2w=w615-h900-v0

14cf6a63-71b7-46c9-ab91-ba594edb0364

CHRIST THE LORD OF THE SABBATH. 169 

his infirmities, according to the words, ' Bear one another's burdens, 

and so fulfil the law of Christ' When thou wast weak thy neigh-

bour carried thee : thou art made whole, carry now thy neighbour. 

Carry him with whom thou walkest, that thou mayest come to Him 

with whom thou desirest to abide." 

Ver. 9. 

 

And immediately (Syriac) in that moment for on thai 

day was the Sabbath. Christ designedly healed upon the Sabbath, 

both because the Sabbath was the highest festival of the Jews, which 

therefore it was right to sanctify above other days by good works, 

such as healing a sick man like this paralytic : and also because 

He hereby wished to show the Jews that He was the Lord of the 

Sabbath. For in bidding him take up his bed, which was a thing 

forbidden by the old Law, He showed that He was Messiah and 

God. Moreover, because the Sabbath was a day dedicated to rest 

and the praise of God, Christ gave rest from his pains to this sick 

man, and so afforded a notable occasion for praising God on this 

day. 

Ver. 10. 

 

The Jews therefore, &c. As Nonnus paraphrases, 

" Clamorously they uttered an accusing charge, ' It is the Sabbath, 

which every one ought to keep wholly in rest : it is not lawful for 

thee to carry thy bed.' " Speaking generally, they say the truth 

; 

for among the Jews it was a matter of the highest obligation to keep 

the Sabbath. All work was then forbidden, as appears from Exodus 

xx. 8. And especially the carrying of burdens on that day is for-

bidden by Jeremiah (xvii. 21, &c). Christ, however, here says the 

contrary to the sick man whom He cured, because He, being Lord of 

the Sabbath, could dispense with its obligation. Moreover, what 

was forbidden by the Law upon the Sabbath was servile work, not 

a pious and Divine work like this. Christ bade the man who was 

healed take up his bed that the crowds of people who were flocking 

into the Temple on the Sabbath might become acquainted with 

the miracle, and acknowledge Jesus, its author, to be the Messiah, 

giving Him thanks. 

Ver. 1 1.—He answered them, &c. Understand, This was indeed a 

Divine man. and by Divine power has healed me. Therefore He is a

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzM_7_tTOxz9FBG5NskC9SeqasR-wFK2PuFY0Cz33kAHgAi8GCO0oLcVEn6bWcnS3UQIWVXIujkYYxeoKSyk-6L1sGzxJR9mEwsS5LfLLjwMjf6g0k2Rgu-YIIhLX22IGWwgFuJ2Q=w615-h900-v0

a35c2319-850c-44d7-9cc0-33bc67bbf5d1

170 S. JOHN, c. V 

friend of God, and would not bid me do anything except what is 

pleasing to God. As S. Augustine says, "Should I not receive a 

command from Him from whom I have received healing?" Just 

indeed was this defence of the sick man, which the Jews ought 

to have understood and accepted, but being blinded by pride they 

could not receive it, and so sinned by persecuting Christ and fell 

into hell. 

Ver. 12. 

 

Therefore they asked him, &c. Being indignant, they say 

with threats, " Who is that bold and insolent man, who dare bid thee, 

contrary to the Law, carry thy bed upon the Sabbath day? Verily, 

that man is not of God who does not keep the Sabbath which God 

has ordained." Thus they spoke through a blind prejudice derived 

from this Law, which they did not understand. Whereas, on the 

contrary, they ought to have understood that He who had miracu-

lously healed the sick man, could not have done it except by the 

singular authority and help of God, and therefore that He had 

equally received from God the right to say on the Sabbath, Take 

up thy bed and walk. 

Ver. 13. But he who was healed, &c. The man knew not the 

name of Jesus, nor whither He had gone, nor indeed who He was, 

for he had never seen Him before. 

Departed. Euthymius gives the reason. " As soon as He had 

healed the man, He withdrew because of the crowd, partly to avoid 

the praise of the just, and partly to take away occasion for the 

envy of the unjust." S. Chrysostom gives another reason : That the 

man's testimony in the absence of Jesus might be less liable to 

suspicion. For if he who was healed had praised Christ to the 

Jews before His face, he might have seemed to have done it out of 

favour. But now that he praised Him in His absence, it is evident 

that he did so from the love of the truth. 

Ver. 14. Afterwards Jesus, &c. The Arabic is, Now thou art 

healed, return not to sin, lest a worse evil be done thee. 

In the Temple. From this it appears that this man who was 

healed by Christ, as soon as he had carried his bed to his house, 

went to the Temple to give God thanks for His great benefit of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwPsF4ZtdJ56bG0KqWcjLp30zebH9B_h0TiPIDaM5Z0BPiNGejXfpFhpE3YFxhkDZV_EtN_b0a6xIAcsVXSDFD5VFTXpzVnH-sdqOKsgzD2lSDXvhxnKIPh7LVSEkPgRVZOAP62=w615-h900-v0

1169f987-02ae-4b0a-a31b-97e75181424d

DISEASE BECAUSE OF SIN. 171 

healing. As Chrysostom says, "Assuredly a great mark of piety 

and reverence. He did not go to the market-place, or the porch 

 

he did not indulge in pleasure, or ease ; he was occupied in the 

Temple." 

Sin no more. From hence it is plain that God often sends 

diseases upon sick persons on account of their sins ; and that this 

man had been afflicted because of his sins. Thus this paralytic, 

who had been sick for thirty-eight years, from a time before Christ 

was born, had committed some crime, which God wished him to 

suffer for, and expiate, by this protracted disease. Christ therefore 

tacitly admonishes the man's conscience that he should be mindful 

of his sin, and be contrite, and avoid it for the time to come. At 

the same time He intimates that He, being a Prophet, knew this 

by Divine revelation. Wherefore when sickness is sent by God 

upon any one, let him examine his conscience, and blot out by 

repentance and confession the sin for which God has sent the 

sickness, and let him pray to God to pardon his sin, and take 

away the disease. 

I said, often sends, for God sometimes sends diseases upon holy 

men that he may prove, increase, and crown their patience, as He 

did in the case of Job, whose whole dispute with his friends turned 

upon this point ; his friends urging that his sins had given occasion to 

his being so grievously afflicted, whilst he, on the contrary, contended 

that he was free from sins, and had not deserved those afflictions. 

And God in the last chapter adjudges the dispute in his favour, and 

condemns his friends. The same thing will appear in the case of the 

man who was born blind (chap. ix. ), of whom Christ spake thus, 

"Neither did this man sin, nor his parents, that he was born blind." 

Moreover, as Christ healed this sick man's body at the pool, so 

did He both by His inward inspiration, and by his external admoni-

tion, heal his soul in the Temple. He brought back to his memory 

the sins of his youth, by reason of which he had deserved so long 

a sickness, and he moved his heart to contrition for them, and to 

ask pardon from God, that so he might be justified. Indeed, Christ 

healed his body for this very reason that He might heal his soul.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxfig1TTSFgFluYouGfj__GDy9-BSPAxs1RcRojlCza-69WaB0CTY-m_1HiLvFm5-aEUqBevgAi1omLsc983qBu_EGeZFi_ZLekSSp4SP8Hlag8tGnvRPEeTSiDsF8_3gALz2Yf0g=w615-h900-v0

fdf4d7c2-300e-45b2-b975-d02696c9bff8

172 S. JOHN, C. V. 

Lest a worse thing, &c. " For," as Theophylact says, " he who is 

not made better by a former punishment is kept for greater torments, 

as being insensate, and a despiser." "And this happens," says 

Euthymius, " either in this life, or in the life to come, or in both." 

"A relapse is worse than the original disease." So a relapse into 

a fault is worse than the fault on account of the greater ingratitude, 

boldness, impudence. 

Ver. 15. 

 

The man went away, and told, &c. Not out of male-

volence, but from gratitude, that he might not hide the author of 

so great a kindness. So Augustine, Chrysostom, and others. " He 

went away and told," says Euthymius, " not as being wicked, that 

he might betray, but as being grateful, to disclose who was his 

benefactor. Because he thought he should be guilty of a crime if 

he kept silence, therefore he proclaimed the benefit." 

Ver. 16.— Wherefore the Jews persecuted Jesus, &c. Some Greek 

MS., also the Syriac and Arabic Versions, add, And sought to kill 

Him. Wherefore, i.e., on this pretext, for the true cause was envy. 

For the Jews, especially the scribes and Pharisees, were envious at 

this glory of Jesus, and grieved that the people should prefer Him 

to themselves. They were indignant that their wickedness was 

reproved by Him, and condemned by His holiness. For they 

wished to be paid court to as Rabbis, and doctors of the Law, and 

oracles of wisdom and sanctity. 

Ver. 17. But Jesus answered, &c. " The Father 7vorketh," says 

S. Augustine (lib. 4, de Gen., cap. 12), "both affording suitable 

government to things created, and having in Himself eternal tran-

quillity : " for, as he says elsewhere, " being still He worketh, and 

working He is at rest." And after an interval, "The power and 

virtue of the Creator is the cause of existence of every creature. 

And if this virtue were ever to cease from governing created things, 

their forms (species) would cease at the same time, and all nature 

would come to an end." Like as the light in the air vanishes if 

the sun withdraw his rays, by which light is produced. The mean-

ing is, "You, O ye scribes, object against Me the law of Sabbatical 

rest, which God commanded you because He Himself rested on

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxk8LHOT_Y9uPoXnC4WIQeXoCoWmNF9PdjDCQEibF_iVihgoEW8YYEFbymaSVkWww01OevFaeIS08VqJ6WJJNNePfbXibErLBMDyth3zxD39l1Biw1Ffj83DyQz-4e191xLhkPdLA=w615-h900-v0

69531e7e-25f1-476e-b2c1-0db09928ba54

MY FATHER WORKETH. 1 73 

the Sabbath from all His work. But I answer that God on the 

Sabbath only rested from producing new species of things. But 

He did not rest in such a manner that He is not every Sabbath 

continually working, that is to say, governing and preserving the 

world, and all the things that are in it, moving the heavens, bringing 

forth one thing out of another, feeding and healing all living things, 

&c. This, which is work of the highest beneficence, is not servile 

work, but pious and Divine. Such work is indeed lawful 

; 

yea, it 

adorns and hallows the Sabbath. So too I, who am the co-equal 

Son of the Father, always work, and always have wrought the same 

things with Him. For neither do I work without the Father, nor 

the Father without Me." So S. Augustine and others. 

Observe the Hebraism : and I work, that is, so, or in like manner, 

I work. For the word and, when it is the mark of conjunction, 

since it joins like things, is a sign of comparison and similitude, and 

means the same thing as thus, as is constantly the case in the Book 

of Proverbs. 

Ver. 18.— Wherefore, &c. His Father, Greek, irarega, Idw, i.e., 

His own Father, because Christ alone is the peculiar, and by nature, 

Son of God. 

Making Himself equal with God, because He had said that not 

merely like things, but that the self-same things which the Father 

works, were wrought by Him, and therefore that He in all things 

co-operated, not as a servant, but as a Son, of the same substance 

with the Father. As Cyril says, "Seeing that He was a man, and 

not knowing that God dwelt in Him, they could not bear that He 

should call God His Father in a special manner." The chief priests 

and scribes therefore wished to kill Jesus, because they feared lest, 

as His glory increased, their authority should decrease ; indeed lest 

Jesus, persuading the people that He was God, should be pre-

ferred by the people to the priests, and should deprive them of their 

authority, and should bring in His own new priests and pontiffs, 

which we see He actually did do. 

Ver. 19.— Verily, Verily, &c. cannot: "not from defect of 

power," says Euthymius, " but on account of inseparability. For

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyRpu5myVgrCTzRUqH84o-GszUTzHmldNW2LAt6tExg3RSKWDZmVV6kAsFAS6twipuiSs_smVDkjQi3SMzwzl9W58v2DxOFF4ui5hMCK2efhH2Mcr-EXxR9umYqgGmKihJamiP1Mg=w615-h900-v0

fc513658-1a99-4516-83f2-7f436420adae

174 S - J°HN . c 

-

v-

it is impossible that the Son should do anything which the Father 

does not." So S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine. Except, or unless. 

This word is not here exceptive, signifying the same as but only. 

It has the same meaning in Matt. xii. 4. 

What He seeth : Greek, fixiirp, i.e., may see. For it is not before 

He worketh, but as soon as He seeth the Father working, that He, 

Christ, worketh with Him. For Christ as God does not produce 

what is similar, but what is identical with the work of the Father. 

For the action of the Father, which both see and work together, is 

the same. I say action, but not the Hypostatic Union, nor the 

things which depend upon it, for this union has not to do with 

action, but with the terminus in quo. Wherefore, although the 

whole Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by their 

Divine action, have brought about this Hypostatic Union, yet the 

union itself is terminated in the Son, and does not extend to the 

Father and the Holy Ghost. Wherefore the Son only, not the 

Father and the Holy Ghost, became incarnate, and died, &c. 

Observe, Christ in this place only means to say that He has 

received from God the Father His Divine Essence, power, and 

working, as from His Author. He makes use of the word see, as 

if the Son did nothing except what He seeth the Father do, or what 

He sees to be the work of His Father. For children and pupils are 

wont to imitate the ways and deeds of their fathers and teachers. 

Christ is speaking after the manner of men, or as amongst men it 

becomes a son to speak of his father. 

It may be added that Christ in a proper and theological sense 

uses the word see, because He proceeds from the Father as the 

Word, which is the term of the vision and the notional cognition of 

God the Father. For the Father, as seeing and understanding 

Himself and all things, produces and begets the Word, and by this 

communicates to Him His own vision and action. Therefore the 

Son neither seeth, nor doeth anything except what He seeth the 

Father see, or do. For He Himself is the Word and the Idea, in 

whom, as a Term, the Father expresses and imprints all His own 

vision and cognition, both speculative and practical. The meaning

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwNYc5oftum2x6vcWRJymfT8yAsuDv3YQ4EO4aqjp79nsFGxHclun_J0CfzmCNmkEc4Cu1TaWnVwTQLl8EsmPpEY2udthw0NcvkwLMEQfQU1GABu9LVR5ttzfTm0ObfqApRKFRqUQ=w615-h900-v0

9e4341d9-8f1c-40a5-915d-7a3c3710fe1b

THE FATHER SHEWETH THE SON. 1 75 

then is this, " Whatever I work, the Father worketh the same, and 

by altogether the same vision, cognition, will, power, and action. 

Wherefore if ye accuse Me because I have healed one paralysed on 

the Sabbath day, ye accuse God the Father also. For He hath 

wrought this with Me, because He in Me and by Me worketh all 

things. Indeed, I have received all My work from the Father. 

Wherefore, if ye believe that God the Father works all things rightly, 

wisely, and holily, ye ought to believe the same of Me, and there-

fore that this healing on the Sabbath was a work prudent, holy, 

and Divine." 

Doth likewise: altogether in the same manner, with the same 

liberty, the same power, the same authority. So S. Gregory 

Nazianzen (Orat. 2, de Filio). S. Cyril says, "They do likewise, or 

work in like manner, who are altogether of the same nature : but 

as to things which have a diverse essence there cannot be in them 

the same mode of working. As therefore He (the Son) is God of 

true God, He is able to do likewise the same things as the Father." 

Ver. 20. 

 

For the Father, &c. Showeth, not as a master to a 

disciple, says Euthymius, but as a father to a son, as God to God. 

Showeth therefore means gives, communicates, especially because, as 

I have said, the Son by demonstration, i.e., by understanding and 

vision, proceedeth as the Word from the Father. To show in the 

sense of give, exhibit, attribute, is used in 1 Sam. xiv. 12; Exod. 

xxxiii. 19; Ps. iv. 6, &c. That this is the meaning here is plain 

from what follows. Moreover, the Father showeth, i.e., communicates 

all things to the Son in that He is God, not by free love, but by 

nature, out of the fecundity of the Divine Essence, of which the 

greatest sign among men is love. For he who among men com-

municates all things to his son, by so doing gives an eminent token 

that he loves him in the highest degree. Moreover, the Father 

communicates all things to the Son in that He is Man, of which 

communication love is not the sign, but the cause. "For the 

Father to show to the Son," says Bede, "is by the Son to do what 

He doeth." 

Admirably does S. Athanasius say {Disp. cont. Arium, lib. i),

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx6vvEyycPkU4NVP6eBWRp1BXjUfPCYLWJh2RRJmWKu9XK3aeW4V8KSu1t59yeNI8kbDAkOfLrQr1An3_5UkRtcm_1W9njxqxXzVZdBtQJE1UC0D_8GaBocL8aYZM0yMmG2QyKE4w=w615-h900-v0

267ba3d1-cd71-4110-bb8d-7958381a0d0e

176 S. JOHN, c. V 

" The Almighty Father hath given to the Son omnipotence, majesty 

to majesty, to virtue He has given virtue, to the prudent one He 

has given prudence, foreknowledge to the foreknowing, eternity to 

eternity, Divinity to Divinity, equality to equality, immortality to 

immortality, invisibility to invisibility, to a king a kingdom, life to 

life ; and He hath given not something other than that which He 

hath ; and as much as He hath, so much hath He given." 

You will ask why to manifest and to show here and elsewhere are 

put for to give and to communicate. I reply (i.) because God by 

showing Himself and His works to the Son, communicates to Him 

His own knowledge, and consequently His essence. For God's 

knowledge is the same thing as His essence. (2.) By showing, 

He illuminates the Son, i.e., He communicates His own light of 

wisdom, and of all good, and Himself, wholly to Him. For God 

is the uncreate and infinite Light, as S. John shows (1 Epist. i. 5). 

Lastly, by showing, i.e., by understanding, He produces the Word, i.e., 

the Son. For in God the most noble thing is understanding, and 

the most noble action is to understand, to illuminate, to show. For 

the noblest and chief power of the soul is intellect and reason. 

These command the will, and guide it as it were blindfold ; and by 

it they rule and move all the other senses and powers of the soul. 

Hence comes the axiom of the wise, " Mind effects all things 

: 

" it 

is the part of reason to govern. Just as strong as any one is in 

intellect, so far is he able to command. For the intellect in con-

ceiving and understanding, by means of conception and intelligence, 

in a lively manner incorporates all those things into itself, and as 

it were possesses them. For it conceives all things in itself in a 

certain lively manner, and forms an appearance of them in itself, 

which presents to it all the goodness and beauty of things. Where-

fore the understanding is the eye of the mind. As in the body 

the eye is the noblest and most efficacious sense, which incorporates 

into itself the forms of all things, far more does the understanding 

do this in the mind. Wherefore the blessed in heaven, by means 

of the understanding, in understanding and seeing God, incorporate 

Him into themselves, possess Him, and are blessed by Him.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw9psvrGatlsbh03lpZ3tcdA6BTAbAoZ9IwQGVhV6Q9jGz7FEeoQA9UPFy3Sm2VnXenM5KgJGIvbyBAmqcJvKHjhVEVIwMstviSXXxvHvKaq40pNJUvvjD4GejoEhXshCGHm_m1QA=w615-h900-v0

d2604323-b741-4784-96e3-3daad6bcc7ed

BLINDNESS OF THE JEWS. \JJ 

This then is the reason of this mode of speech by which to show 

is taken for to give, to communicate, to bring one into possession of 

the thing shown. This is what Aristotle says, "The intellect by 

understanding becomes all things," because by a lively conception 

of things it assimilates itself to them, and them to itself. Thus it 

seizes and holds them, and makes them to exist in a nobler and 

better manner in itself than they are in themselves. For in them-

selves they are often dead and inanimate, but in the intellect they 

are living and animated. They live in the highest and most 

excellent vital act. 

And will show greater things: by showing will give and com-

municate. These greater things are more illustrious mysteries and 

miracles, especially the raising of the dead, and the authority to 

judge all men ; of both which Christ proceeds to speak. 

That ye may marvel. He does not say that ye may believe. For 

the scribes and the Jews, when they saw so many miracles of 

Christ, wondered at His power, but yet were blinded by envy and 

hatred, and would not believe in Him as the Messiah. Still Christ 

did those things with the intention that they should believe in 

Him. The heretics act in just the same way even now. They 

admire the wisdom, holiness, and miracles of the orthodox saints, 

but will not follow their faith, nor imitate their manner of living. 

Such is heresy, and the blindness, obstinacy, and malignity of 

error. 

Ver. 21.— For as the Father, &c. Behold here is the first 

greater work which Christ said the Father would show, that is, 

communicate, to the Son. As S. Cyril says, " Marvel not that one 

who was utterly weakened by long disease was strengthened by 

a word, and took up his bed, and went away, for I am about 

altogether to destroy death, and to judge the whole world." 

So also the Son, &c. He tacitly signifies that He is God, equal 

to the Father in power and liberty to raise and quicken whom 

He will. 

Whom He will. It is not that the Father wills to quicken some, 

and the Son wills to quicken others, but the same, because His will 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxCJZtqAMOb37-YiQ9SejltjSs7it3rgcoFRt0d4FmBj2oX2sIiWuCCzzie4XfZ4W2dIImL0mrI3YDXmkUgD3qB2tsgf3xltgPC_Y7M6e8EltLNjca5BxF--Ez4VW3LvjFxEbCE=w615-h900-v0

a4e14c0f-e8bc-4762-abdf-35d2010b8562

178 S. JOHN, C. V. 

is conformable, yea, the same as the will of the Father. So 

Augustine. 

Quickeneth, i.e., raiseth from the dead, both in this life, as He 

raised Lazarus, and in the day of judgment, when He will raise 

all mankind. 

Ver. 22. 

 

For neither doth the Father judge, &c. The Arabic 

omits for, but the Greek has it, and appositely. For this is the 

second reason by which Christ proves that He is God, and the 

second greater work which He said the Father would show Him. 

As Cyril says, " He brings forward another Divine and excellent 

argument, by which He shows that He is by nature truly God. For 

to whom else does it belong to judge the world but to God only ? 

" 

To His Son. One God with Himself, but by His Incarnation 

made man. As S. Austin says (lib. 1, de Trin., c. 13), " No one shall 

see the Father at the judgment of the quick and the dead, but all 

shall see the Son, because He is the Son of Man, that He may be 

seen by the wicked also, when ' they shall look on Him whom they 

pierced.' 

 

You will say, Christ has been created Judge as man, according 

to the words (Acts x. 42), " Who has been constituted by God the 

Judge of quick and dead," therefore Christ cannot prove from His 

being Judge that He is God. I answer, that this correctly proves 

it, because the power of judgment is a thing peculiar to God : it is 

a matter of the highest and most ample right. Wherefore neither 

would God communicate it, nor could it be fittingly communicated 

to a mere man, but to Christ alone, who is both God and man. 

For He as God has the supreme authority to judge, but as man, He 

is able to exercise this judgment visibly before men, to acquit, or to 

condemn. For a judge ought to be seen and heard by those who 

are accused. 

Ver. 23. That all, &c. For the Jews who would not then 

honour the Son of God, or acknowledge Him to be such, when 

they shall see His Divine power and majesty in the day of 

judgment, will be compelled to acknowledge, honour, and adore 

Him as God.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy40AknAqPMaNlzxdVUfx8W-DgTdCjdAGfgUpl9MBwEurFU82LP3OB8jXw0l8qdb1ZFByJiLFCf4xUjcjtEP3OWZYqFFPajWRSmwO2inFRbeI1sl56w1DElFeKM36HxlggnKyOGbg=w615-h900-v0

fd944cea-4f7d-4592-bad6-ea533b085320

THE CHIEF ARTICLES OF FAITH. 179 

Like as they honour the Father: the words like as signify equality, 

not similitude. 

He who honoureth not the Son, &c. Because by denying the 

Son he denies also the Father ; for father and son are correlative 

terms : and he who has not a son cannot be a father. With 

regard to God, he who denies that the Son is the Son of God, 

denies that God the Father is truly and properly the Father, and 

has begotten. Tacitly he asserts that He could not beget a con-

substantial and co-equal Son. Moreover he denies the Father, because 

the Father sent the Son into the world, that by Him He might be 

honoured, in such a manner that He should be acknowledged to be 

the Father properly so called, and to have begotten a Son of the 

same substance with Himself, and to be adored with the same latria 

as Himself. He therefore who denies that the Son is God, denies 

that the Father begat God, which is the highest blasphemy of the 

Father. For he deprives the Father of that offspring which is His 

equal, and worthy of Himself, and instead of a Divine and un-

created offspring assigns to Him one that is created and mean. 

Wherefore he denies Him to be a proper and Divine Father. 

Ver. 24.— Verily, verily, &c. See what has been said on iii. 3. 

Heareth, so as to believe and obey My word. Thus He subjoins, 

and believeth in Him that sent Me, and by consequence believeth in 

Me as His Son, sent by the Father into the world to save it. He 

saith not, and believeth in Me, but speaks with greater amplitude. 

For in saying, and believeth in Him that sent Me, He implies the 

mystery of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, which two things are 

the chief articles of the Faith, and chiefly necessary to salvation. 

For He who sent the Son is God the Father ; the Father and the 

Son together necessarily breathe the Holy Ghost, Lo, you have 

the whole Trinity. 

Hath, i.e., by right, deservedly, and in hope. See on iii. 16. 

Hath passed, i.e., certainly will pass (the perfect is used instead of 

the future because of the certainty of the thing, meaning, he will as 

certainly and infallibly pass as if he had already passed)//w« death, 

the temporal death of the body, unto life, eternal and blessed, in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxFU39V7sijam9Fx5ijMH6N-1g_ELpJfYsjBHO3kAMeY3u59XnazSAmQNM6fe-4mWpEXT5vpYGuf5qa70zWAqV-GIi1UCZ8vIylsBw6_ix-EeTojVOdYh4sdL15N_oxvwF8LwAF=w615-h900-v0

108c5e66-6d4d-4dae-adac-c875b1916a9b

180 S. JOHN, C. V. 

heaven. For although the reprobate who will be damned will also 

be raised again to life, that they may burn in hell, yet that life in 

hell is rather a continual death, than life. For, as St. Austin saith, 

(de Civ., lib. 6, c. 12), "There is no more complete and worse death, 

tnan where death dieth not." For in hell there will be living death, 

and deathly life, that is, always dying, but never dead. Again He 

speaks yet more plainly. He who believeth and obeyeth God the 

Father, and the Son who is sent by Him, hath passed from the 

death of the soul, dead through sin, to the spiritual life of grace, 

that he may after the death of the body pass to the life of glory. 

Ver. 25.— Verily, verily, &c. "Lest thou shouldst think that 

this is to come to pass after a very long time, He subjoins, and now 

is. For if He were only announcing things future, there might not 

unreasonably be doubt, but He saith that these things shall come to 

pass whilst He is still conversant upon earth." So Chrysostom. For, 

as Theophylact says, " He is speaking here of those three whom He 

was about to raise, the widow's son, the daughter of the ruler of the 

synagogue, and especially of Lazarus. For this last He was about 

to raise in Judea. And Christ is here speaking in Judea to Jews. 

This then is the signification of now is. Christ then rises from the 

spiritual resurrection of souls from sin to the life of grace, to 

the resurrection of those bodies which He was about to raise whilst 

He lived on earth. From this He rises to the full resurrection 

glory of the bodies which He will raise in the day of judgment. 

For from His power to raise souls from the death of sin to the life 

of grace, as from a thing greater and more difficult, Christ proves 

that He has power to raise the body, a thing less difficult. So 

Toletus, Jansen, and others. But S. Cyril and others think that 

the reference in this place is to the general resurrection, and they 

take the expression, and now is, to refer to the last judgment. For 

S. John (1st Epist. ii. 18) calls the whole time of the New Law the 

last hour, i.e., the last time, because this is the last stage of the 

world, and therefore all things which are done in it seem to be, as 

it were, present, and to be done in this present hour. 

Some add that Christ is here speaking of the saints whom He

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwwWo2WlexyG4nVAiOYMQ-0i6KlM9_6aKur3u4bzv3HfTJ_p5dF-3erAWpPXI6JolgT_C-tJbqMGr1LMJLosfZ-MURMUfJ6Tt7X7PgtDb07QEP5EQLyWE_HZYpsgFU5LVRIzWirFQ=w615-h900-v0

87db6b9e-4710-44f6-a583-cb8d32c81563

LIFE, THE ESSENCE OF GOD. l8l 

raised when He Himself arose from the dead (S. Matt, xxvii. 52). 

The fullest meaning of the passage is to understand it of all whom 

Christ has raised, and will raise from the dead. 

And they that hear, i.e., who shall feel the force of the voice of 

Christ, or who shall obey Him, as hearing the voice of the Son of 

God, who calls the things which are not as though they were. 

Ver. 26. 

 

For as the Father, &c. To have life in Himself signifies 

three things, r. To have life from Himself and from His own 

Essence, and from no other source. For the Essence of God is life, 

and His life is His Essence. God therefore essentially, and by His 

Essence, is essential, uncreated, and infinite life. 2. That God has 

life in Himself, is that He is the fountain of all life, of angels, men, 

and animals. As Euthymius says, To have life in Himself means 

that after the manner of a living fountain He is the Author of life, 

according to the words, " With Thee is the well of life " (Ps. xxxvi. 

10). 3. Which follows from the two previous meanings, to have life 

in Himself means to have life in His own power, to be the Lord of 

life to all things living, so that He according to His own good 

pleasure gives them life, preserves it, and takes it away. This makes 

plain the unity of Essence, i.e., of Deity, in the Father and the Son. 

For if the Son had a different Essence from the Father, then He 

would have life in another, that is to say, in the Father, who gave 

Him life. But now He hath life in Himself, i.e., in His own Divine 

Essence, which He hath altogether in common with the Father. 

So S. Chrysostom. " Behold," he says, " how they differ not in any 

respect whatsoever, save that the one is the Father, and the other 

the Son." 

So hath He given also, &c. In that He is the Son of God, and 

that according to the three ways just spoken of. As S. Augustine 

says, that His life might not have need of life, that He should not 

be understood to have life by way of participation : for if He had 

life by way of participation, He might, by losing the participation, 

become without life. Such doctrine concerning the Son accept not, 

think not, believe not. The Father therefore continues as life, 

the Son also continues as life. The Father is life in Himself,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAznDcywU1oAyBI1ZDOtpdBce_y9_vDKr4FE8Qjui5xrTzDKPVspTBzxV-5y2YWREi2hwUbCoghXozOsW5paeqLHeZiwC0qOoG2zGrPtuQMkgCExUgQtyrRbCXhNeZszpG59V405Hg=w615-h900-v0

d83e1427-ed69-46fa-9fc6-bdc01a1b97b3

182 S. JOHN, C. V. 

not from the Son: the Son is life in Himself, but from the 

Father." 

Ver. 27. 

 

And hath given, &c. Because Christ as God hath life 

in Himself, from hence, in that He is man, He hath power to judge 

all men. The word because must here be taken specifically, and 

means inasmuch as. But it may be taken even more expressively 

in a reduplicative and causative sense, as giving the express reason 

why God gave Christ judicial authority. That reason is because 

Christ is the Son of Man, i.e., because He deigned to become Incar-

nate. As though it were said, "God hath willed to judge men 

by Christ a man, that judgment might take place in a congruous 

manner, that is, after a sensible and human manner, that as He Him-

self saved the world by the man Christ, so He would also judge it 

by the same, by that man, I say, who is God, who took human life, 

and laid it down for man's salvation." 

Wherefore it is that He by this great emptying of Himself, by 

which He willed to become man, merited this exaltation of judicial 

power, that He who was the Saviour of all should be the Judge or 

all. So Maldonatus and others. S. Augustine gives also a twofold 

reason. The first is, "that those who are to be judged might see 

their Judge. For those who shall be judged will be both good and 

bad. It was right that in the judgment the form of a servant should 

be shown both to the good and the bad, but the form of God should 

be reserved for the good only." The second reason is, "because 

the Judge shall have that form in which He stood before His judge. 

That form which was judged shall judge : unrighteously was it 

judged, but righteously shall it judge." 

Ver. 28. 

 

Marvel not, &c. the hour, i.e., the time of the 

Evangelical Law, which is the last, and in the end of which shall 

be the resurrection of the dead, and the final judgment 

In their graves: those who are dead and buried, including also 

the unburied dead. For as S. Augustine says, " By those who are 

buried in ordinary course, He signified also those who do not 

receive ordinary burial." 

The voice of the Son of God: this shall be the sound of the arch-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxY1Hvoz3luKvBVimDxWnwEintC99OsxLVWrq3gd-ampSpnOg88ciwv6Nn90jjsPC2CEdPoqdByypF-oOgNCCcLhKBmTGC4JXy2R_NXGIm_MiWpkg-VcHNNr8JI0eLI4TqOz414=w615-h900-v0

caaa4c01-f5c5-4310-b085-7449480d6d89

THE LAST JUDGMENT. 183 

angel's, probably Michael's trumpet, Arise, ye dead, come to judgment 

This shall be accompanied by the sound of the trumpets and voices 

of other angels. The sound is spoken of as the voice of God, 

because by His command, through the ministry of angels, an effect 

shall be produced on the air which shall resound throughout the 

whole world, and be effectual as at least a moral instrument to raise 

the dead. For it is not necessary to attribute to this trumpet any 

physical power of raising the dead. 

Ver. 29. 

 

They that have done good, &c. . shallproceed, Greek 

hiroeiuaotrai, i.e., shall go forth, out of their tombs and their graves, 

towards the Valley of Jehoshaphat, where the universal judgment 

shall take place. 

Christ here sets before the unbelieving Jews His authority to 

judge, that through fear of it He may make them fear, may make 

them contrite, and convert them. He did the same at the end of 

His life, when, being adjured by Caiaphas, the High Priest, to say 

if He was the Son of God, He answered that He was, and added 

(Matt. xxvi. 64), " Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on 

the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." 

There is nothing more terrible, and at the same time more effectual 

for rousing the minds of men to repentance and leading a holy life 

than a lively representation of the last judgment. So Christ, when 

He ascended into heaven, commanded His apostles by the angels 

to preach his return to judgment (Acts i. n). S. Paul pressed 

the same thing upon the Areopagites (Acts xvii. 31). For in that 

judgment shall the destiny of each be finally decided for everlast-

ing happiness or everlasting woe. " In all thy works," therefore, 

"remember thy last end, and thou wilt never sin " (Ecclus. vii. 40). 

In very deed that fateful day will be the last of this world, and the 

horizon of eternity, which shall separate the just from the unjust, 

and set them far apart, heaping upon the just utmost felicity, and 

weighing down the unjust with calamity, and that for ever and ever. 

Think constantly of this wonderful difference, be zealous for holiness, 

live for eternity. 

Ver. 30.—/ cannot, &c. Christ shows that His judgment, by which,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxC9yTQCuEpIwApzIGhtP1Zz5JgyAMof17tmWrvNRu7HjH1Jfj72W-r1akwDPhqdzUgjYBa83_W-0n9sBukJ3ieT1rAmLLmtBVZ2JGB-7vnA8yWZCtrZm8Xlr6qAqtrYFCHX7CV8g=w615-h900-v0

5c3e0954-3b98-4c86-ac76-305c2d740e17

1 84 S. JOHN, c. V. 

as man, He will judge all men, will be a just judgment, tor this reason, 

that He cannot either judge or will any other thing than that 

which the Father judges and wills. For He, in that He is God, 

has the very same judgment, the very self-same Divine mind and 

will that the Father has. But in that He is man, He is wholly 

governed by the Divinity and the indwelling Word, so that He 

can neither judge nor will anything but that which the Godhead 

judges and wills. So S. Augustine. 

As I hear, so J judge always, and especially in the judgment 

day. / hear, i.e., / know, I understand. As S. Chrysostom says, 

" By hearing nothing else is meant than that nothing else is possible 

but the Father's judgment. I so judge as if the Father Himself 

were Judge." 

Because I seek not Mine own will, i.e., Mine own alone, or diverse 

from the Father's will, for I have no such will, but the will of Him 

that sent Me: for My Divine will is identical with the Father's, 

and My human will is wholly conformable to the Divine will. As 

S. Augustine says, " not that He has no will of His own in judging, 

but because His will is not so His own as to be diverse from the 

Father's will." He gives the reason a priori why His future judg-

ment should be just, because, indeed, His will is altogether subject 

and conformed to the Divine will, because it subsists in the 

Divine Person of the Word, and is ruled by it. For the will bends 

and rules the intellect and its judgment in whatever direction it 

pleases. 

Ver. 31. 

 

If I bear witness of Myself, that I am the Son of God, 

and therefore as man altogether conformed to the judgment and will 

of God, My witness is not true, that is, legitimate, judicial, worthy of 

credit. The word true here is not opposed to false, but to untrust-

worthy, uncertain. It answers to the Hebrew word neeman, faith-

ful, worthy of credit. For it may be that a man may utter most 

true testimony concerning himself, and yet may fail to gain credit 

because of a suspicion that he has too great love of himself, as 

Euthymius says. 

There is a prolepsis by which Christ meets a tacit objection of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz0xrXpV7QvAWQJ25FAGpVLmA7bqfGS51eSZeysNRdzzlBn3lND8Z-uszWrfyhWMpGdKM--1kHuT1XF8zx8-DjMoiz1Zp7YFS2NS-wCO7q7xc047AstphrBDGKSM0tkxSx-hhZAhw=w615-h900-v0

34cbd8ab-3f58-4274-9622-3fb60857722f

WITNESSES TO CHRIST. 1 85 

the scribes, to the following effect : " Thou, O Jesus, proclaimest 

Thyself to be the Son of God, and so in all things to follow the 

judgment of God. But we will not believe Thee unless Thou 

shalt prove what Thou sayest by the testimony of God, or of men 

worthy of credit. This testimony of Thine in a matter which 

peculiarly concerns Thyself appears to us open to suspicion." 

Jesus replies, " I grant you that My testimony concerning Myself 

is not legitimate, nor worthy of credit, if I alone bear witness of 

Myself. I grant therefore that you need not believe Me alone 

 

but I am not alone, but others worthy of credit bear witness of Me, 

as will appear by what follows." Christ is here speaking of the 

common opinion of the Jews, not uttering His own sentiments, as 

appears from chap. viii. 13, where the Jews openly object to Christ, 

Thou bearest testimony of Thyself, Thy testimony is not true. Then 

Christ answers, My testimony is true, &c, because I am not alone, but 

I, and the Father who sent Me. So S. Cyril. 

Ver. 32.— There is another who beareth, &c. Another, viz., God 

the Father, who at My baptism spoke in thunder from heaven, 

This is My beloved Son. So S. Cyril, Bede. Again, another, i.e., 

John the Baptist, testifies to Me. So S. Chrysostom and others. 

Another then here means, there are others who testify that I am the 

Son of God, namely, God the Father, John the Baptist, Moses and 

the Prophets, also My Divine works and miracles. For all of 

these Christ proceeds to adduce as witnesses to prove that He is 

Messiah, and the Son of God. 

And I know that it is true. So far as I Myself am concerned, I 

do not need these witnesses, for by Divine knowledge I know that 

what they testify is true, that I am the Son of God. But I bring 

forward their testimony for your sakes, that ye may believe what 

is attested by so many witnesses. 

Ver. 33. 

 

Ye sent unto John, &c. Ye sent messengers to him as 

a man in your estimation holy, and worthy of all credit, to ask him 

if he were the Messias. John answered that not he, but I, am the 

Messias. This testimony he gave not out of friendship, or favour 

to Me, but to the truth. For that he would testify to nothing but

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzypeLG75745Gj20-xtFxlAOkYHbQtxwZMiX3Qluvi_Ky7DEHVO5z9d-MvgNJ9L428JPp3SnNrZJBuAW_HwM9yGpInQxGuq6VKaWQ_X6diKkFzNGPIalWsEM9f7zOQMBGPVoCBt=w615-h900-v0

0f231774-4dfe-4d68-b0f2-27417bea57f7

1 86 S. JOTIN, C. V 

the truth, ye yourselves thought, when ye were willing to receive 

him as the Messiah. Therefore ye cannot reject his testimony, says 

Euthymius. 

Ver. 34. 

 

But I receive not, &c. I do not require the witness 

of John, for I am God, and the Son of God, to whom John, Moses, 

and the Prophets ought to yield, and be taught by, and receive 

authority from. 

But this I say that ye may be saved: meaning, as S. Chrysostom 

says, "I do not need the testimony of man, for I am God. But 

since John, whom ye admire as a prophet, is of so great authority 

with you, when ye do not believe Me working miracles, I bring 

back to your remembrance his testimony, that I may draw you and 

save you." 

Ver. 35. He was a burning and shining lamp ; Greek, Xu^oj, 

the illustrious and famous lamp. John was not the light itself, 

shining of itself (for this was what Christ Himself was), but he was 

the lamp or lantern which, receiving light from Christ, burnt in 

himself with the knowledge and love of God, and afforded light to 

others by the example of his sanctity, and the fervour of his preach-

ing. For God sent John after a long silence for ages of all the 

prophets, as it were a heavenly prophet, to be a lamp to illuminate 

the dark ignorance of the Jews, and to show them the true Light, 

Christ the Lord, and to bear a torch before Him. So S. Cyril and 

others. For the Only Begotten One is Light by nature, who, out 

of Light, that is, the Substance of the Father, hath shone forth. 

John indeed was a lamp, because he shone with light derived from 

Him. He shone through oil, i.e., with the grace of the Holy Spirit, 

which coming into our souls as it were lamps, nourishes and keeps 

them. Wherefore the type of John was the lamp of oil burning 

before God in the Temple in the Holy of Holies. For so did John 

shine before Christ. Therefore was John the Baptist always a 

burning and shining lamp in the tabernacle of witness, as Cyril says. 

Moraliter, S. Bernard {Sertn. de S. Joan Bapt.) teaches that holy 

men and preachers ought first to burn with charity and zeal in 

themselves before they shine in preaching to others. ''John was a

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyqE1o_zkTqY-k_o35XIRe6QWVX_7bQpguBJXQubmcsXyFCZDS1HZLfvq4KJHT3K1irnAGYeI2UUKjacBK7Yyv94lZfD438ez_1KPTlO5qJrtQF--XjYneBnoj3_ISPJ11OLtanGQ=w615-h900-v0

670726df-607d-45b0-922e-73fdd1f874a5

S. ATHANASIUS. 1 87 

burning and shining lamp. It does not say, shining and burning, 

because the brightness of John sprang from his fervour, not his 

fervour from his splendour. For there are some who do not shine 

because they burn, but rather burn in order that they may shine. 

But these plainly do not burn with the spirit of charity, but with 

the love of vanity. Listen to Alcuin on this passage : " John was a 

lamp, enlightened by light from Christ, burning with faith and love, 

shining in word and action, who was sent before to confound the 

enemies of Christ, according to the words, ' I have prepared a lamp 

for My Christ, I will clothe His enemies with confusion '" (Vulg.) 

Such a one was S. Athanasius. Hence S. Gregory Nazianzen 

(Orat. 21), speaking in his praise, calls him "the eye of the world, 

the prelate of priests, the leader and master of confessors, a 

sublime voice, a firm pillar of the faith, next to John the Baptist, a 

second burning and shining lamp." He adds, "Athanasius was as an 

adamant to the persecutors " (by his invincible patience), " a magnet 

to disputers, to attract them to himself, and to make them be at 

harmony one with another." And again, " Let virgins praise him 

as their betrothed, wives as their director, anchorites as him who 

wakes them up, monks as their lawgiver, the simple as their guide, 

those given to speculation as their theologian, the joyous as their 

moderator, the unfortunate as their consoler, the aged as their 

staff, youths as their instructor, the poor as a dispenser, the rich as 

their almoner, the sick as their physician, the whole as the guardian 

of their health, and, in short, all as he who is made all things to all 

that he may gain all, or as many as possible." Such a one was 

S. Basil, of whom the same Nazianzen says, "The voice of Basil 

was as thunder, because his life was as lightning." Because he 

lightened in his life, therefore did he thunder with his voice. 

But ye wished to rejoicefor an hour (Vulg.), i.e., for a short time, in 

his light. When John began to preach with so much sanctity of 

life and zeal, ye rejoiced because so great a prophet had been sent 

by God, who, ye trusted, would be your Messiah. But when John 

began to rebuke your wickedness, and to indicate that I, the poor 

and lowly One, was the Messiah, ye despised John. Ye would not

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz2TdyB6MFXeQ14vRsuncs-Jq_NoTAu1-l_sls7DvpAT3_Nj_Y51HmzaOpAPNG72X83U1MFpbAJ3knM0ao9YIk3L7tZ9zLuq_xicfvBnZnEhsszrUbyk0YQ4ShreaANHwLRPtr82Q=w615-h900-v0

8349653b-5916-435a-84ae-152a44428465

188 S. JOHN, C. V. 

believe his testimony, because if ye had believed it, ye would have 

received Me as the Messiah. 

Ver. 36. 

 

But 1 havegreater witness, &c. : i.e., than John's witness 

; 

greater in the sense of surer, more efficacious, that I am Messiah, the 

Son of God. This greater testimony is My works, My miracles 

which the Father hath given Me, that by them I may show that 

He hath sent Me. " For one might find fault with John's testimony, 

as if it were given out of favour," says Euthymius ; " but the works 

being free from all suspicion stop the mouths of the contentious," 

says S. Chrysostom. " For the works might convince even the 

insane." 

The -works (the miracles) which I do, &c, such as the recent 

healing of the paralytic. I speak of My supernatural works, which 

could not be effected by any natural cause, but are peculiar to God 

alone. Wherefore they are as it were the seal of God, by which He 

bears testimony to Me, and seals and confirms My doctrine. So 

S. Chrysostom and others. 

From this it follows that the Jews both could and ought to have 

known of a certainty that Jesus was the Messiah, or the Christ, 

and the Son of God, by the miracles which He wrought. 1. Because 

He did them with this end and object, that by them He might 

prove that He was Christ and God. 2. Because Jesus did all the 

miracles which the prophets had foretold would be done by Christ. 

3. Because although certain of the prophets and holy men had done 

some miracles, they had done neither so many nor so great as 

Jesus had done. Again, the prophets had wrought miracles, not 

by their own power, but through invoking God ; but Christ did 

them by His own power, and His own authority, as being the Lord. 

Whence it was easy to discern that He was the Messiah and God. 

In two special ways therefore the miracles of Jesus prove that He 

is God. First, by the way in which He wrought them, as I have 

said ; because He employed that most mighty power, peculiar to 

Himself, in working miracles. Then He reserved some miracles to 

Himself, which by their very nature prove beyond possibility of 

doubt that He was God. Of this sort was His birth of a Virgin, His

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzzf58n_JBodssiEAVW5t01dEVfBxIjxoo7TingNWojvSCuIf-W1gk0NXLmFfCnR8NuXjY4y65FCgBBuWnhltxbX2hb77SHJwlbiYbFwf_ro_q2sI9qluerhLx5LvVBhzyOm2G2CQ=w615-h900-v0

0653d277-80ec-4f0f-b7ac-ea651ca05272

CHRIST'S MIRACLES UNIQUE. 189 

knowing the secrets of the heart, and what was in man, and all 

things. This last was the reason which the apostles gave for 

believing that He came forth from God. Of like nature was His 

foretelling all things which were about to happen in His Passion, 

death, and resurrection, according to the Scriptures. Also that 

when He willed He laid down His life upon the cross, and resumed 

it on the third day ; that He ascended into heaven ; that He sent 

the Holy Ghost ; lastly, that He transmitted that marvellous power 

of working miracles to His apostles and seventy-two disciples. 

This also was peculiar to Christ of which I am about to speak,—the 

force and the power at all times and in all places, ready and at 

hand, wholly unrestricted, of working such great, such incredible 

miracles, and so wholly beyond the power of nature; so full and 

perfect, so salutary, so true, so sure and glorious, so Divine, and so 

in accordance with the character of the Son of God ; among which 

stands pre-eminent that salutary and instantaneous power of healing 

every kind of disease in all who in all places and at all times 

approached Him for the sake of recovering their health. This 

absolute power, and ever-abiding virtue, belongs to Christ alone 

Neither Elijah, nor Eliseus, nor even Moses, nor any angel, had it 

in the time of the Old Testament; for all these only wrought 

miracles at intervals, as appears from perusing their histories. 

Moreover, their miracles are summed up in a definite number; the 

miracles of Christ were continuous and incessant, and could not be 

numbered. So S. Augustine and others. Add to all this the results 

of the death of Christ, the conversion of the whole world by twelve 

fishermen, the fervour of the faithful in the primitive Church, the 

unconquerable strength of innumerable martyrs, yea, the exultation 

in their torments of even boys, virgins, and women. All these things 

proclaim aloud that Christ is to be worshipped, loved, and adored 

as the Son of God, for He alone could work such Divine works 

peculiarly belonging to God. 

Ver. 11.— The Father, &c. hath borne witness, as at My 

baptism. Again, He hath borne witness concerning Me, through the 

Scriptures by Moses and the prophets.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy9aXr_6ALF0aqCEIvIUVzhDdSSkt6IPCjSzPUTcchxQ0Tc1mAve6xPqrNJgMn0N6GKtz3UiQtOjxC4Rh81uwMh8bRflX9mr0Q86qxHlK2BsHtaMt34TiOp3rE7_RsB_t7oQFIOog=w615-h900-v0

1963b891-7993-493c-a3db-7079c02b37f2

igo S. JOHN, C. V. 

Observe, Christ in this place, besides the testimony of John, 

adduces three other and greater witnesses to show that He is the 

Messiah : i. By His miracles (ver. 36) ; 2. By the Father's voice 

at His baptism 

; 3. By the Scriptures (ver. 39). 

Ver. 38.— Ye have not His word abiding {Arabic, made strong) in 

you, &c. The connection and subsequent argument of these words 

is obscure, which different writers explain in different ways. 

1. You may explain them as a sort of concession, thus : " You, 

O ye scribes, when I allege the testimony of God My Father concern-

ing Me, make objection that ye have not heard it, that ye have neither 

seen His face, nor His appearance, as Moses saw, whom ye profess 

to believe. I grant what you say, but I add that no one, not even 

Moses, heard God's own voice, nor saw His appearance, nor His 

face. They only beheld that immense fire by which God was con-

cealed, and heard a sound formed in the air by an angel, instead of 

God's voice. For I alone, who am the Son of God by nature, have 

heard His real voice, and seen His appearance, or His Divine face, 

which I see continually. Nevertheless I urge upon you that ye have 

heard the voice of God giving attestation to Me, when at My baptism 

the Father publicly declared, This is My beloved Son, in whom I am 

wellpleased. Again, ye have heard the word of God concerning Me 

in the Holy Scriptures, Moses and the prophets, who bear witness 

that I am the Messiah. But ye, although ye have heard this word and 

testimony of God concerning Me, yet have it not abiding in you, 

because ye receive not in your minds, nor understand, nor believe 

it, inasmuch as ye do not believe in Me, as sent by God. In this 

ye gravely err and sin. For if ye have heard the word of an angel 

in God's stead speaking with Moses as His servant, and believe him, 

much more ought ye to believe the Word of God bearing witness to 

Me that I am His Son, especially since Moses bears witness to Me, 

and bids you to hearken unto Me, as follows. So Euthymius. 

This meaning seems clear, plain, and true. 

2. However, S. Hilary (lib. 9, de Trin.) thus connects and expounds 

this whole passage. " This is why ye have not heard His voice, nor 

seen His appearance, neither doth His word abide in you, because

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx4lrO_Fd57RVEWe8tD_aO8iFJLGE_fxuqI3u45g18dG9RPuRBiRqdFr-DvQMhGiowFklY2A-_3-j_04DU1IfygJgHOtkqpkqs4FzoA9laAmLlxGR7FodVpg7-2h4oEZbjbs_lWYQ=w615-h900-v0

fdadb0a6-1c49-48fe-a1f3-48e7d3fa3f05

THE FATHER'S VOICE. 191 

ye do not believe in Me." As though it were said, " If ye would 

believe in Me, ye would hear the Father's voice, and see His 

appearance. For he that seeth Me seeth the Father also. In like 

manner, he that heareth Me heareth the Father also, and the word 

of the Father abideth in him." 

3. SS. Cyril and Chrysostom think that these words were spoken 

to confound the Jews, who boasted that they had heard and seen 

God promulging the Decalogue on Sinai. " Ye boast falsely, O ye 

Jews, that ye have seen and heard God on Sinai, for God is a pure 

Spirit. Wherefore that voice which ye heard, and that appearance of 

fire which ye saw on Sinai, was neither the voice nor the true appear-

ance of God, but only a corporeal symbol and figure, shadowing 

forth to you who are fleshly and ignorant the invisible Godhead." 

4. S. Athanasius {lib. 4, cont. Arian.) by the Word, Greek, Xoyoj, 

understands Christ the Son of God, who is the Word of the Father. 

This he asserts is aptly joined with the appearance and form of 

God, because He is the character, and the lively image of the Father. 

And the meaning is, "Ye have not heard the voice of God, nor 

seen His form ; and when there remained for you one only way to 

do this, by believing in Me, who am the Word of the Father, and 

the image of His Substance (or Person), whom whosoever seeth 

sees also the Father, ye despise this way, and will not believe Me. 

Wherefore ye know not the Father, and are deprived of Divine 

knowledge." 

5. Toletus : " Ye, O ye Jews, being terrified by the voice of the 

angel's trumpet, and by the fire that lightened on Sinai, asked that 

ye might not hear any more that terrible voice, nor see the dreadful 

fire, but that God might speak to you by Moses as a mediator. 

But you keep not the promise by which you bound yourselves. 

You accepted the stipulation that ye would hear the Prophet of your 

own nation whom He should send. But His word and compact 

abide not in you, because what ye promised ye are not willing to 

fulfil. For, behold, I am He whom He has sent, and ye neither 

believe Me, nor hear Me, as ye promised." 

The first meaning seems the best and most apposite.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxqnq_LPtb8gG4cCR5BTvg9secQxFNNVx9E6UUhEHQC7hoHfEOBdlFp9HfWEG2ox6XKi43w1InpkBu7_6jup9R3CsqrKyoCYaBgHR4S33h2Kii5jt9oFjYDi8satOAU4xJWtFQuRg=w615-h900-v0

8431313f-a6a3-4bc4-a400-aaae4bdc3677

192 S. JOHN, C V. 

Ver. 39. 

 

Search (scrutamini) the Scriptures, &c. The word for 

Search in Greek, as well as Latin, may be taken either in the indi-

cative, or the imperative mood. Cyril takes it in the indicative 

 

" Ye, O ye scribes, assiduously turn and search the Scriptures which 

bear testimony concerning Me, but ye do not care to understand 

them, because ye will not come unto Me." But SS. Augustine and 

Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and others, take it in the 

imperative : "Search ye the Scriptures, and in them ye will find God 

the Father bearing witness to Me." 

Moreover, by the word Search, Christ, says S. Chrysostom, pressed 

upon the Jews not merely the bare reading of the Scriptures, but 

a thorough and diligent examination of them. He did not say, 

Read the Scriptures, but Search them. Dig out the hidden treasures 

which they contain concerning Me and Divine things, just as those 

who search for veins of gold and silver dig in the earth to find 

them. Thus the Beraeans to whom Paul preached (Acts xvii.) 

searched the Scriptures, with a sincere desire to know nothing but 

the truth. Therefore in the Scriptures they found Christ whom 

Paul preached to them. 

Because in them, i.e., in understanding and believing them, ye 

think, &c. Because if any one believes and does what the Scrip-

tures bid him, he will attain eternal life. From this it is plain that 

most of the Jews, and especially the Pharisees, believed in the 

immortality of the soul, and in an existence after death, in which 

God would give eternal life to the just, and death eternal to the 

unjust. 

And (Vu\g.), i.e., because, for the Hebrew vau, or and, often has 

a causative force, meaning because, for Christ now gives the reason 

why He said, Search the Scriptures : because they are they which 

testify of Me. Many parts do this literally, many more in an 

allegorical and mystical sense. For " Christ is the end of the 

Law " (Rom. x. 4). And as S. Peter says, " To Him give all the 

prophets witness, that all who believe in Him should receive remis-

sion of sins through His name." Let therefore the reader of Holy-

Scripture, but especially interpreters, doctors, and preachers search

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzUxML88IUJXBAacgHqbn6ZOM-NWaZCya0eOxdxCj39HD7IrR3YogCi8tq2pv50wmJzJm5k0AZBJ--Cx4kGEHCPoEQd8VXXuhkEKVKT9uPiUWhV8nFYhmpObgKwU5fnxvpgrON0=w615-h900-v0

722a64a3-172a-4b64-b046-c1ca007273ba

TRUE CAUSE OF THE JEWS UNBELIEF. 193 

the Scriptures, and they will find Christ in them all, either openly 

revealed, or else veiled in shadows and figures. 

Ver. 40. 

 

And (yet), ye will not, &c. " Ye do not wish to cleave 

to Me, to believe in Me, to receive My doctrine and My law." 

Ver. 41. I receive not brightness (Vulg. claritatem), Greek, ha^av, 

i.e., glory, from men. There is an anticipation, "Ye, O ye Scribes, 

suspect, and object that I preach such great things of Myself, and 

so carefully endeavour to prove My dignity and authority out of the 

desire of vain glory, that I may catch the breeze of popularity, being 

desirous of being taken to be the Son of God. I answer that I do 

not preach these things about Myself in order that I may get glory 

from men, but for your own sakes, that I may save you. For I am 

even athirst for your salvation. For I know that no one can be 

saved, and possess eternal life, but by Me, whom God has appointed 

the Saviour of the world." So S. Cyril. 

Ver. 42. But I know you, &c. " I know and penetrate the 

inmost recesses of your hearts (for I, being God, am the Searcher 

of hearts), and I see in them nothing of Divine love, but that they 

are full of ambition, avarice, and pride. And this is the reason why 

ye will not receive those clear testimonies which I bring forward 

in My favour. The root from whence your unbelief and obstinacy 

spring is not ambition of glory in Me, but your own lack of charity. 

For if ye truly loved God, ye would indeed acknowledge that I 

have been sent by Him, and am clearly described in the Scriptures." 

Thus even now the cause of heresy in many is a vitiated love, be-

cause indeed many love the liberty of the flesh which heresy 

teaches, and do not love God, who forbids it. 

Cyril connects this verse with what precedes, thus,—" I have not 

proclaimed these great things about Myself for the sake of glory, 

that I may gain human praise, but that ye may learn (as I know) 

that the love of God is not in you, deprived of which, how can ye 

come to Me who am the Son of God ? " 

Differently also Maldonatus and Toletus : " I preach that I am 

Messiah, and the Son of God, not because I seek the vain glory of 

men, but because I know that ye have not that love of God which 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwkafFXYOgiGxE8vVyto5clLoj7yS19eNvT7pzZduXMOAmXjoHgYC2U1WuO83ubzFKaqt25RkIcDcsvRCGPwjKGPuxWW8ddYrNxds2EXH82DKkL3HE0hwlqclRpotL4hVMVknRiyw=w615-h900-v0

aa7585c4-97c9-4a6e-8b00-d32636a39989

194 S. JOHN, C. V. 

leads to eternal life, so that I may lead you to this love by faith, by 

which ye may believe in Me." 

Ver. 43.—/ am come, &c, in My Father's name, as the Son sent 

by God the Father, that by His authority I may fulfil those things 

which He has promised to you concerning Messiah, to His alone 

praise and glory, so that through Him there may be showered upon 

you the knowledge of God, grace, salvation, and eternal life. This I 

have clearly proved to you by the many testimonies which the Father 

hath given Me. Yet ye do not receive Me, but treat Me as a false 

prophet. Wherefore by the just judgment of God it shall come to 

pass, that if another, who is really a false prophet, shall come to you, 

one who is not sent by God, but who shall come in his own name, 

i.e., in his own authority, falsely boasting himself to be the Messiah, 

such an one ye will receive. Another therefore will be that Anti-

christ whom the Jews will receive, though they rejected Christ. To 

this apply the words of Paul (2 Thes. ii. 10), "Therefore God 

shall send upon them the working of error, that they may believe a 

lie, that all may be judged, who have not believed the truth, but 

have consented to iniquity." So SS. Chrysostom, Cyril, Augustine, 

and the ancient writers, passim. Again, another may mean any false 

prophet, pretending to be Christ, and therefore a forerunner of Anti-

christ, like that Egyptian, shortly after the time of Christ, who led 

thousands of men to destruction {see Jos. Bell. Jud. lib. 2, c. 12). 

Ver. 44. 

 

How can ye believe, &c. " Ye love human glory, brief 

and poor : wherefore ye contemn Me, who despise human glory, 

and teach that it ought to be contemned ; and that the Divine and 

eternal glory ought to be aimed at, which God will begin in the 

saints on earth, and bring to perfection in Heaven." 

Ver. 45. Think not, &c. Listen to Cyril, " He declares that 

there was no need of any other accuser, for that although all others 

were silent, the law of Moses by itself was sufficient for the condem-

nation of the Jews who did not believe in Him." He names Moses 

because the Jews placed all their faith and trust in him. As they 

said, " We know that God spake unto Moses : as for this fellow, we 

know not from whence He is" (John ix. 28).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwtulh9Ype_5kivMVc8l6Y3APAzW1tCEJg1DzvZ9I6IxlFj85rZ0QtH-MdaM-dv-ywBjU14z_BbUlWlbjdntfrevgFifzhWayL1l7KSa5clxPjQPZ_WTnLqI-RmNqO0lyC8-0aMMw=w615-h900-v0

af086939-5de2-48bd-9c2c-ffbff086001f

MOSES WROTE OF CHRIST. IQS 

Ver. 46. 

 

For if ye had believed Moses, perchance (Vulg.)^ would 

also have believed Me. Perchance ; so the Vulgate often translates the 

Greek, u> : but it is here used in the sense of assuredly. It is an 

expression of confirmation, not of doubt. " Assuredly ye would have 

believed Me." Hence some copies omit the word perchance. 

For he wrote of Me: both in Leviticus, and the whole Pentateuch; 

for all his ceremonies and narrations prefigured Me. Also he clearly 

and expressly wrote of Me (Deut. xviii. 15, 18), saying, "The Lord 

thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of 

thy brethren, like unto me ; unto him ye shall hearken ; I will raise 

them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and 

will put my words in his mouth ; and he shall speak unto them all 

that I shall command him." 

Again Moses wrote of Christ (Gen. xlix. 10), when he speaks of 

the time at which Messiah was to come. " The sceptre shall not be 

taken away from Judah, nor a leader from his thigh, until He that 

is to be sent shall come : and the same shall be the expectation of 

the nations" (Vulg.) 

For already the sceptre had failed from Jacob, and had been 

transferred to Herod. Therefore it was the time of Messiah's 

Advent. 

Ver. 47. But if, &c. This is an argument ad hominem. For 

the Jews preferred Moses to Christ. Wherefore He rightly reasons 

against them thus : " If ye do not believe the writings of Moses (of 

whom ye make the highest account) which he wrote concerning Me, 

far less will ye believe My own words. In vain therefore do I bring 

so many testimonies, since I see you confirmed and obstinate in 

your hatred and rebellion against Me. Therefore I conclude My discourse. I will keep silence and depart.'

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxejivOaOP4g39Eejw3RLR9DsQEXZkRP4epTZEZYzoV44wKiAYCFAL-gKZwWNodISzxirii2AjV-D5eDKgQLRH8j1c0-U9XNW-_K9Ug5MCc-kGBBB6c7FyJv6xL0EellGw7N3NBng=w615-h900-v0

78638584-0847-44b9-b11a-4737478eddae

( 196 ) 

CHAPTER VI. 

I, Christfeedeth five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes. 15 Thereupon 

the people would have made him king. 16 But withdraiving himself, he 

walked on the sea to his disciples: 26 reproveth the people flocking after him, 

and all thefleshly hearers of his word: 32 dcclareth himself to be the bread of 

life to believers. 66 Many disciples depart from him. 68 Peter confesseth 

him. 70 Judas is a devil. 

AFTER these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is the sea oi 

>- Tiberias. 

2 And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he 

did on them that were diseased. 

3 And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples. 

4 And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. 

5 IT When Jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto 

liim, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat ? 

6 And this he said to prove him : for he himself knew what he would do. 

7 Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for 

:hem, that every one of them may take a little. 

8 One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him, 

9 There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves and two small fishes : but 

what are they among so many? 

10 And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in 

the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 

11 And Jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he distributed 

to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down ; and likewise of 

the fishes as much as they would. 

12 When they were filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments 

that remain, that nothing be los.t. 

13 Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the 

Fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them 

that had eaten. 

14 Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This 

is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world. 

15 II When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by 

force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone. 

16 And when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea, 

17 And entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum, And 

it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. 

j8 And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyppdYs8_tPldgzqWMMRnEJmq2FwK4Zu1cCrUXNuVnDOjZoCT8ZdctG-QUhawsO6HZ9w2doAwxT1l-SijufP3d0m1CL6xpEEhiftG9UaoKro62HqsHvwzPxBz4XqHvQGJeMyatIdg=w615-h900-v0

7f0e376c-1b9d-4c88-adaf-b3891de17079

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. \r)7 

19 So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see 

Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship : and they were afraid. 

20 But he saith unto them, It is I ; be not afraid. 

21 Then they willingly received him into the ship : and immediately the ship 

was at the land whither they went. 

22 IT The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the 

sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his disciples 

were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat, but that his 

disciples were gone away alone ; 

23 (Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where 

they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks :) 

24 When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, 

they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus. 

25 And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto 

him, Rabbi, when earnest thou hither? 

26 Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, 

not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were 

filled. 

27 Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth 

unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you : for him hath God 

the Father sealed. 

28 Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works 

of God? 

29 Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe 

on him whom he hath sent. 

30 They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may 

see, and believe thee? what dost thou work? 

31 Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. 

32 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you 

not that bread from heaven ; but my Father giveth you the true bread from 

heaven. 

33 For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth 

life unto the world. 

34 Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. 

35 And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life : he ihat cometh to me 

shall never hunger ; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. 

36 But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not. 

37 All that the Father giveth me shall come to me ; and him that cometh to 

me I will in no wise cast out. 

38 For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of 

him that sent me. 

39 And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath 

given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. 

40 And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, 

and believeth on him, may have everlasting life : and I will raise him up at the 

last day. 

41 The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which 

came down from heaven.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzWiJ_aJi2YXyyaYNwrtf7T6eFnPpmDOgyuQdJymQls-E7-z3aD2FQcl8Uo6igzj70P-1fu-VX_DBJ66mgrOntAoPNgjGe2jrYBcOK2wwyDRVqSfa8_h1FD04Ng4VO-dEhNFZQLlQ=w615-h900-v0

13d5bd92-8521-4104-b145-db01a3f3e25b

198 s. John, c. vt. 

42 And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother 

we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? 

43 Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among your-

selves. 

44 No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him : 

and I will raise him up at the last day. 

45 It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every 

man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto 

me. 

46 Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath 

seen the Father. 

47 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. 

48 I am that bread of life. 

49 Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. 

50 This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat 

thereof, and not die. 

51 I am the living bread which came down from heaven : if any man eat of 

this bread, he shall live for ever : and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which 

I will give for the life of the world. 

52 The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man 

give us his flesh to eat ? 

53 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the 

flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. 

54 Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life ; and I will 

raise him up at the last day. 

55 For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. 

56 He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I 

in him. 

57 As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father : so he that 

eateth me, even he shall live by me. 

58 This is that bread which came down from heaven : not as your fathers did 

eat manna, and are dead : he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. 

59 These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. 

60 Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an 

hard saying ; who can hear it ? 

61 When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto 

them, Doth this offend you ? 

62 What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before ? 

63 It is the spirit that quickeneth ; the flesh profiteth nothing : the words that 

I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. 

64 But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the be-

ginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. 

65 And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, 

except it were given unto him of my Father. 

66 IT From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more 

with him. 

67 Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? 68 Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast 

the words of eternal life.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxrArTkF70C9_sNBA6f2JRk5QUmeejuFvT_kGvYjXDCfWRa1JEQW10WqSJYOJ-wbFhflyJPUy8-GHSkXNhC_GUCotgm2aHVP6z5TQnEnMjGRp2_qndUBkeOgd07ubPERPE7THlXFQ=w615-h900-v0

ff8f2d72-f545-4474-afeb-9359fd34c4f6

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. tgQ 

6o And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the 

living God. 

70 Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a 

devil ? 

71 He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon : for he it was that should betray 

him, being one of the twelve. 

Ver. 1.—After this, &c. Tiberias is here named, because the 

desert in which Christ fed the five thousand was near to Tiberias. 

After this, not immediately, but almost a year afterwards. For 

the healing of the paralytic, and the dispute of Jesus with the Jews 

consequent upon it, which John had related in the foregoing chapter, 

took place in the beginning of the second year of Christ's ministry. 

But the things which he relates in this sixth chapter took place at 

the close of the same year. This is plain because Christ healed 

the paralytic at the Passover (v. 1). But He did the things now to 

be related shortly before the Passover of the year following, as 

appears from the 4th verse. John therefore omits all that Christ 

did in the second year of His ministry, viz., His creation of Twelve 

Apostles, His Sermon on the mount, His sending His Apostles 

forth, as well as many other things. John omits them because they 

had been fully narrated by the other Evangelists. But he here 

inserts the narrative of the multiplication of the loaves, because, 

though related by the other Evangelists, it was the occasion of 

Christ's discourse concerning spiritual food, and the food of the 

Eucharist, which John here gives at length, and which was wholly 

passed over by them. 

Ver. 3. 

 

He saith unto Philip, &c. Observe, this was the order 

of what was done. Christ beholding from the mountain the crowd 

which followed Him, came down to them and received them kindly, 

taught them, and healed their sick until the eventide. The evening 

being at hand, His disciples asked Christ to dismiss the multitude, 

and refresh Himself with food. But Christ bade them first feed 

the hungry throngs. This, they said, was impossible, because 

200 denarii worth of bread would not suffice for so many. By 

and by Christ proposed the same thing to Philip, probably because 

he had been most anxious in asking Christ to dismiss the multitude.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAycLSV_wM8LIb9egmF7H4xaXgJWuVx5daJpO50pOG_FX_BdvQWNSGP7dM4IIjkZf0cdmEITrAnym1mXpAIFzo02jPHhlYdXtDTjenUVZJhFyWECDb24pxl87THQaN_zy99zbTmekQ=w615-h900-v0

44251d7b-0a09-4f76-9a04-768fe17a6776

200 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

Philip gave the same answer as the others with regard to the 

quantity of bread that would be required. 

Ver. ii.— When He had given thanks to God the Father, looking 

up to heaven, He implored the help of God to multiply the loaves. 

Then He blessed them (as the other Evangelists relate), and the 

Syriac has here, He distributed to those who had sat down, miracu-

lously multiplying the loaves during their distribution. S. Dominic 

and S. Francis imitated Christ in this matter. When in the General 

Chapter of the Friars Minor there was nothing to eat, they being 

full of faith, said, " Let us go and pray to Almighty God, who 

satisfied five thousand men besides women and children in the 

desert. His power and His mercy are no less now than they were 

then, that we should despair of His goodness." They continued in 

prayer until they were assured concerning the Divine will. Then 

at the hour of dinner S. Francis bade the brethren sit down in the 

refectory. This done, they see enter twenty young men of noble 

appearance, girded, and prepared for service. These supplied 

bread, wine, and every kind of needful refreshment to the company, 

in number five hundred. When dinner was ended they bowed and 

saluted the brethren, and went out of the refectory two by two, to 

the admiration of the brethren, who praised God for His marvellous 

care and providence. (See Luke Waddings Annals of the Friars 

Minor, a.c. 12 19, num. 11.) S. Dominic did the same thing at 

Rome at S. Sixtus'. When there was no food in the house he com-

manded the brethren to sit down to the table, and blessed it. 

Then lo, there came in two angels, having the appearance of 

beautiful youths, who placed before each one of the hundred 

brethren a very white loaf. Then they bowed their heads, and 

departed. (See the Life of Dominic, lib. 3, c. 4.) I have visited and 

venerated the place at Rome where this was done, and seen a 

painting of it. 

Ver. i$.—T/iat they might take Him, &c, i.e., the king Messiah, 

who, the Jews thought, would give them abundance of corn, wine 

and oil, gold and silver. This was why they wished to make Him 

a king, not for His advantage, but their own. Such is the Messiah,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwnZ1AaNuHiK7pHpQ8VHNVenyelmaexc0mTHedrC8Zvo2It-BIspz4GMbilWrcDW0CQNWy51GLGLg6584ywHidf9hDTyzZsF3XhfIW4Gbmdik7fwEFHlfrHuqBaPqfSZpOM3kkK=w615-h900-v0

40e52d11-ce0b-4931-89f0-7e628a6bffec

DO ALL THINGS WITH CHRIST. 201 

whom the foolish Jews expect even now, one like Solomon, to give 

them riches and plenty. 

Ver. 21. 

 

They wished therefore, &c. They wished Him, now 

that they recognised Him, whom they had before taken for a 

spectre, and been affrighted at. And immediately, i.e., by the power 

and virtue of Christ's presence, the ship was at the land. As 

Nonnus says, " By the Divine impulse the ship of her own accord 

touched at the distant port, as it were a soul with wings." This 

land was Genesar, as S. Matthew calls it (xiv. 34), or Genesareth, as 

S. Mark (vi. 53). The ancient name was Cenereth, from the city so 

called, which was near Caphamaum. From this place the whole 

sea of Galilee was called the Lake of Cenereth, or Genesareth. 

Moreover the city of Capharnaum was situated in this land of 

Genesareth, to which, John says expressly, Jesus sailed with His 

disciples (vi. 17, 24, 25). Here was uttered His prolonged dis-

course concerning heavenly bread and the Eucharist. For the 

60th verse says expressly, These things He spake, teaching in the, 

synagogue in Capharnaum. 

Observe the expression, and immediately. From this it follows 

that Christ caused this ship to fly in a moment to the harbour of 

the city of Capharnaum. Thus it sped eight or nine miles in one 

moment. For this was the distance between Bethsaida and Caphar-

naum. For the disciples in sailing from the place where Christ fed 

the five thousand which was midway between Bethsaida and Tiberias, 

had gone twenty-five or thirty furlongs, or four or five miles (see ver. 1 9), 

and were about, or a little past Bethsaida, when Jesus, walking upon 

the sea came to them, and entering into the ship, caused it to fly 

from that spot, as it were, in a moment, and land at Capharnaum. 

Thus He caused the ship to traverse eight or nine miles, as it 

were, in a moment. Learn from this to accomplish all thine 

actions with Christ, having Christ for thy leader and guide. With 

Him thou wilt do great things, without Him nothing. Thus 

S. Peter, though he toiled all night, without Christ, caught no 

fish 

: but as soon as He came and bade him let down the nets, 

he caught an immense multitude of fishes. Therefore as Nazi-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzutLhMJd_GwSj_1gixUMgJWZJSMjB5UgSOL_sNaDmKXJxVOLtuqjXlblilhmJ25Va9Xv6NGYt5rblBdAKXn8usEUwNEVj_S0Yl95gAy2fmzXDOmJToRQht8hdhw5iP4Ve1tQwOsA=w615-h900-v0

e981a1bc-874e-473f-b190-b7cf9a32d762

202 S. JOHN, C. VI 

arizen says in his Poems, " Happy is the man who buys Christ 

with all that he has." 

Ver. 22.— The next day, &c, across the sea, understand, in 

respect of the disciples, who had sailed to the other side of the lake. 

The meaning is,—The day after that on which Christ had fed the five 

thousand, the multitude who had been thus fed continuing in that 

place across the sea, when they knew that there was only one boat 

there, in which the disciples had embarked alone, Jesus being left on 

the land 

 

they soughtJesus, must be understood. For they did not 

know that He had walked on the sea by night, and joined the ship. 

Ver. 23. 

 

But there came, &c. We can see from this verse that 

the place where Christ multiplied the loaves was near Tiberias, and 

therefore that those who sailed from thence to Bethsaida and 

Capharnaum must have sailed past Tiberias. The meaning is, the 

report of the miracle being spread abroad, many both from other 

places as well as Tiberias, came to the place where the miracle was 

wrought, that they might see and hear Jesus who had done such 

great things. 

Ver. 25. And tvhen they hadfound Him . across the sea, that 

is to say in the synagogue of Capharnaum, as is plain from verse 59. 

When, and how earnest Thou hither 1 "For we know that yesterday 

Thy disciples went into the ship by themselves at the desert of 

Bethsaida, and that Thou remainedst there on the land." They 

did not know that Jesus had walked upon the sea in the middle of 

the night. 

Ver. 26. Jesus answered, &c. Through modesty He did not 

answer their question directly, lest He should be forced to say that 

He had come walking upon the sea. He gave a reply therefore, 

which had more direct concern for His questioners, namely, that 

they were seeking food for their bodies rather than for their souls. 

"Ye ask Me, not because ye saw the miracles by means of which 

I labour to teach you faith and repentance, and the other evangelical 

virtues, by which ye may arrive at everlasting life. Ye seek Me, 

not that ye may receive of Me the food of the soul, but because ye 

did eat of the loaves, which I miraculously multiplied, and which I

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx6TqFrcfPsGkmhkx4gN2xwYu3e-S5aNQ4XjgGxWhfga_nvRatUVQMV1qe0qL_N4RCLCIwGJP5_Nsa-_1F86wPqmQwHtMDJOt9AK5UiXSQhISWJWD49UtFA5uQPUV6xBvtH0UEB=w615-h900-v0

09a2af6f-38b5-4ae8-8087-d47d99026dfc

what to labour for. 203 

made pleasant to your taste, in order that ye may again have a like 

experience." For many are the lovers of the loaves and fishes 

rather than of Christ and eternal salvation. For the carnal have a 

taste only for carnal things, because they do not receive spiritual 

things. 

Ver. 27. 

 

Labour not, &c. Labour : Greek, izydfyafe, i.e., strive 

with zeal and labour and sedulous care to get food, not that of the 

body which perisheth, but of the soul which perisheth not. Where-

fore the Arabic translates, labour not on account of the food which 

perisheth, but on account of the food which endureth unto eternal life. 

As Euthymius says, "Labour with the whole mind, with all your 

care continually. He does not command to labour for the food of 

the soul only, but He admonished them to care for the food of the 

body by the way, but for that of the soul with their whole heart." 

Christ rises and draws the multitude from that corporeal bread 

with which a little while before He had fed them in the desert, to 

the far better, and far more needful spiritual bread. As though He 

had said, " I have given you barley bread without any labour of 

yours, but work ye, and labour with all your might, that ye may 

obtain spiritual bread, to nourish you, and bring you to everlasting 

life." In like manner, from the water of the well He led the 

Samaritan woman to spiritual water, that He might teach His faithful 

followers, and especially Priests and Religious, to do the same, so 

that in their colloquies they may lead the people from corporeal to 

spiritual things. Wherefore from this saying of Christ Cyril rightly 

says, " We must have no care for the flesh, but we must watch for 

things that are needful for eternity. For he who follows after 

bodily pleasures differs in no respect from the beasts, but he who 

cleaves to nature, and leads his life according to the spiritual law, 

and is wholly given up to those things which are given us by God, 

and prepare our way for the things above, such a one seems to me 

to know himself, nor to be ignorant that he is a reasonable being, 

made in the image of his Creator." 

You will ask, what is that food enduring unto eternal life, which 

Christ bids us work for that we may gain it ? The heretics called

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw10ChrAtdwGSilKCA2Ee9cKRaEj0DHjP0ZkApWrAG_qKE8fPc9ZeyHiZ7mhJsxli8NHjrHCXR_E_sWVA69Y5qDR0iUQlp2M8r7o-D-b1JJFy2_dJKDN-cI9wpUwUnHBL4EVMH40w=w615-h900-v0

573089a1-28c2-48ae-9bb4-927149e534d3

204 s - JOHN, C. VI. 

Massalians, or Euchites, i.e., Prayers, thought that it was prayer. 

As though Christ said, " Do not work with your hands, because the 

work of the hands perisheth, but alway pray to God in your hearts, 

because prayer is the food of the spirit, and remaineth for ever. 

These heretics said that we should not labour with our hands, but 

should pray always. See S. Chrysostom on this passage. But this 

is a heresy which S. Paul condemns (2 Thess. iii. 10), saying, "If 

any one will not work, neither let him eat." 

I say then that this food which abideth is faith, charity, grace, 

good works, even all things which lead us to life everlasting, and 

especially the Eucharist, as we shall see in verse 54. So Mal-

donatus, Bellarmine, and others. For gradually does Christ ascend 

from minor and common things to those which are greater and of 

the highest importance, such as the Eucharist. As S. Augustine 

saith, "To believe in Him is to eat the food which endureth unto 

life eternal. Why do you make ready your teeth and organs of 

digestion ? Believe, and thou hast eaten." 

Secondly, more appositely, properly and precisely, this spiritual 

food is the Eucharist, as Christ fully explains (verse 54). For He 

first generally (in genere), in the way of a proposition, speaks of this 

food as heavenly, and enduring unto eternal life. By and by in verse 

35, He particularizes, determining what this food is, and asserts 

that It is He Himself. I am the Bread of Life. At length, in the 

54th and following verses, He clearly unfolds the whole matter, 

and says that His Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist is this Bread 

and this Food. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink 

His Blood, ye have no life in you. And, My Flesh is meat indeed, 

and My Blood is drink indeed. For in the space of a year and a 

half, just before His death, He was about to institute the Sacrament 

of the Eucharist, and in It to give us His own Flesh and Blood, as 

the spiritual meat and drink of the soul. But here in those inter-

mediate verses He frequently exhorts to faith, because faith is a 

prime requisite in the Eucharist. 

The meaning then is, Do the works of faith, believe in Me, give 

credit to My words, so shall ye seek, and shall indeed obtain the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz58RIGGSFUljSOf9wl6fWeb4gOnW-DEg27XaEPgS4dF1zF6qfQ0CEf2EAUD5D-i4o997T35fCVNTbYHSW7kvpbI8ob_4g2YTG7RUX38tVDV_ZTs8FgLmfTgEwWBC81CfK38Qul2g=w615-h900-v0

eae400c7-f0cd-44f2-8233-f1ceca8d7887

SEALING OF CHRIST. 205 

food of the Eucharist, which shall not only nourish your souls, but 

bring them to eternal life. For Christ distinguishes the work of faith 

from the food of the Eucharist, which was to be obtained by the 

work of faith ; as the means is distinguished from the end to which 

it leads. Wherefore by and by, when the Jews ask about the work, 

that is, the way and the means by which they might gain this Bread, 

Christ answers (verse 29), This is the work of God, thatye should believe 

in Him whom He hath sent. So Theophylact says, " He calls the 

food which abideth the mystical reception of the Flesh of the Lord." 

And Rupertus, " He that endureth unto life eternal, that is, He who 

is eaten in this mortal life, is profitable to this end, that He should 

give everlasting life to the world " 

For Him hath God the Father sealed. God, Greek, ©eds, the 

Heavenly Father, who is the Most High God. Signed, (Vulg.), 

Greek, ia<j>gdyiai, sealed. This signing, or sealing of Christ, is three-

fold, the first of which is the cause of the second, the second of 

the third. The first is of Christ's Divinity, the second and third 

of His Humanity. In the first place then, Cyril thus expounds (lib. 

3, c. 29), "To be signed is put for to be anointed (for He who was 

anointed was signed), and denoted by the word signing, that He 

was formed as to His nature after the form of the Father, so to 

speak, that He might appear to say, ' It is not difficult for Me to 

bestow upon you the enduring Food, by which ye may be brought 

to the unspeakable delights of eternal life.' For the Son is the 

character of the Hypostasis of God the Father : and the character by 

which He has been signed by the Father is nothing else but the very 

form and substance of the Godhead." Thus Cyril : so too, S. Paul 

(Heb. i. 3), " Who being the splendour of His glory, and the char-

acter of His substance." Whence S. Gregory Nazianzen speaks thus 

of the glory of the Son (Orat. 42), "He is the Fountain of life and 

immortality ; He is the expression," that is, the similitude, the seal, 

" of the Archetype : He is the immovable Seal," that which is not 

altered, or changed to any other form : " He is the Image in all 

respects like : He is the Term and Reason (Greek, ago; xa,i Xoyog) 

Of the Father." These two last expressions Nicetas takes as similar

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwDs9G3sUV_Yt8dV9NXu3pZ5It1F6ZSSncYp0yxskPG-YymbB3OPKdS3KsHcbkIzTzQ1ktdpaGM1WeDXkwBr4EArPeZhkuJ6mYM3jPd3aVG2rax3TrHt9Wl50bWeZ4l0xJDBn5Raw=w615-h900-v0

8af83195-1dc7-4c02-8696-f1e2bf8a8d5d

206 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

in meaning, that the Son is the Word of God the Father, i.e., the 

definition, the demonstration. For as a definition demonstrates that 

which it defines, so does the Son demonstrate, and as it were define 

the Father. Thus Nicetas. 

2. S. Hilary {lib. 8, de Trin.) more correctly and appositely ; The 

Father, he saith. hath sealed the Son, not in the Divinity, by com-

municating to Him His own Godhead, but in the Humanity, since 

He hath united it to the Word, and hath communicated to it the 

Divinity of the Word. For a seal, he says, is wont to be impressed 

upon a different substance, which is called the impression. So the 

Humanity is sealed by the Divinity of the Son. So also Augustine : 

and from him Toletus saith, " Because the Son, who is the image 

and character of the Father is united to the Humanity, therefore the 

Humanity is said to have the seal and character of the Father." 

3. S. Chrysostom and many others say, The Father hath sealed 

the Son, i.e., by the voice from heaven at His baptism, This is My Beloved Son. He showed and demonstrated by His miracles, as 

seals, that He was His very Son. And He confirmed Him as the 

promised Messiah, who was able to impart convenient Food to all 

who desired eternal life. It comes to the same meaning if you 

interpret sealed to mean gave authority, because we are wont by im-

pressing a seal to give credit and authenticity to letters. 

This sense is easy and plain, but the second meaning is more 

solid and sublime. This third meaning flows from the second, and 

completes and perfects it. For the Father by His own voice and 

miracles, which are as it were His seals, has testified to man that 

He has sealed the Humanity of Jesus with the Divinity of the Word, 

ind has impressed upon it the form of His own Divinity, that is, 

has testified that this Man Jesus is true God, and the Son of God, 

so that He may give and gain for Him among men, authority to 

teach, to enact laws, and to found a new Church. Wherefore the 

Gloss says, He hath sealed, i.e., He hath set Him apart from others 

by His own sign." 

Ver. 28. 

 

They said, &c. Cyril thinks that the Jews asked this 

from arrogance, as being angry with Christ because He would

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxHLuLsr07tebtjwWpZfXm_AgNMIpdtcpcvmrZOUoUHSEw9vB4HBrURnRr8g-hjOykr5uZ8PsmGtPI-gqSQWToD7nnvxoX7ggp4poat1iw-fMpChhFrizv_68W5c41wdgTlX_p0=w615-h900-v0

19671b00-3f34-4556-9936-71c363b76c0f

THE WORKS OF GOD. 207 

have reproved them as being careless about their souls. As though 

they said, " Thou reprovest us for seeking after earthly bread and 

despising the Food of the soul. Tell us then what new work of 

God Thou affordest, by which we may please God and feed our 

souls, in addition to those works which Moses gave us to do, and 

wrote in the Pentateuch." 

But S. Chrysostom thinks they said these words out of gluttony, 

because they were again hungering after the loaves of Christ, with 

which they had been fed. That they asked what were the works of 

God, with which Christ wished them to feed their souls, not because 

they intended to do them, but because they would gain His good-will, 

and so invite Him to renew the multiplication of the loaves. 

More correctly, S. Augustine and others think that the Jews spoke 

with a serious desire of doing these works. For many among them 

being stirred up by the doctrine of Christ, and stimulated by this 

miracle of the loaves, were desirous of salvation. Therefore they 

ask Christ what works they ought to work, by which they may 

obtain of God that enduring Food, which would nourish their 

souls, and bring them to eternal life. And Jesus answers sin-

cerely their sincere question, and teaches them what were the 

works of God. This He would not have done, if they had not 

been in earnest. 

They called then the works of God, not only those which were 

pleasing to God, nor those which are the food of the soul, nourishing 

it to eternal life, as Leontius thinks. For they knew by the Law 

of Moses what works were pleasing to God. But by the works of God 

they mean those which He especially appointed and sanctioned by 

Jesus, whom He sealed, that by them they might obtain that spiritual 

Food of which Jesus preached, which nourishes us, and brings us 

to eternal life. For when they had heard that this was the Food of 

life eternal, and that God had sealed Christ that He might give 

this Food, they rightly call the works of God those which it was 

necessary to work in order to obtain this Food. And what they 

were they ask of Jesus, not doubting that He who had been so power-

ful and liberal in nourishing their bodies, could be equally, or rather,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyWZZRh7wjZJIt8NJgFC71YM-AjcUhRo1I0pFU9XhA51WOm6kO13VE4VC9PYUN-cay0HSSNZg-z_9_SqqNL73F3VCushsa6Mf5rqXGLr3pM4OJJeqi_FKcr2TN5EHRGNPi4l56Xmw=w615-h900-v0

8d24b369-804f-4024-bf27-0fde69421f99

208 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

more powerful and liberal, in teaching them what it was, and 

supplying the Food of the soul. 

Ver. 29. 

 

-Jesus answered, &c. Believe, i.e., in Myself, who by 

so many arguments and miracles have proved that I am the Messiah 

sent by God. For the sake of modesty He speaks in the third 

person. As though He said, " That work by which ye will obtain 

Food from God to nourish the soul unto everlasting life, is to believe 

in Me. For I bestow this Food upon those who believe in Me : for 

I Myself am this Food." This He says (verse 35). 

That ye may believe, and believing, may obey Me, and observe 

My law and doctrine, and fulfil it indeed. Under the term faith, 

as a root, Christ and Paul understand all the works of charity, 

penance, temperance, and all other virtues which faith stirs up and 

generates. Wherefore Theophylact says, " Faith assuredly is a holy 

and perfect work, and satisfies those who possess it. For dilligent 

faith leads to every good work, and good works preserve faith. For 

works are dead without faith, and faith is dead without works." 

Ver. 30. They said, &c, i.e., those of the crowd who were bolder 

than the rest, who knew and thought less of Jesus. For they had 

seen the miracle of the multiplication of the loaves the day before, 

whereby Christ had fed five thousand men, but upon this they set small 

value, and ask for one still greater and more wonderful. As though 

they had said, " Thou, O Jesus, askest of us a great, nay a stupendous 

thing, namely that we should believe in Thee as the Messiah and 

the Son of God. But for this the miracle of the loaves which Thou 

wroughtest yesterday, does not suffice. For Moses did a similar, 

yea, a greater work. Show us therefore a heavenly and Divine and 

worthy sign, by which God may attest that Thou art His Son, and 

our Messiah." Therefore they add by way of explanation, 

Ver. 31. Ourfathers . as it is written (Ps. lxxviii. 24). As 

though they said, " Moses fed our fathers in the desert, even more than 

six hundred thousand men, with heavenly and most sweet food, even 

the manna, and that daily for forty years, which was a greater thing 

than Thy multiplication of the loaves yesterday : and yet Moses did not 

wish to be accounted, or believed to be Messiah, and the Son of God,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw7KgszJeV6NDYsM6KdGthf-DjFNkkOy79eAxNbVBc2D2i01mwmksWW_xkUgudFVKvUPbMaocfkyEHPyEZBJutVibEfs7zd45wLvlu2KJUCKorNmu1ZQPZCAukIdWL5UGVAetq6=w615-h900-v0

ba39796f-744a-4092-98f3-417faed7a3f2

BREAD OF HEAVEN. 209 

Since then you, Jesus, desire to be so accounted of, it is necessary 

that you should work greater miracles than Moses." So SS. Augustine 

and Cyril. The latter adds, " Such was the sign they asked of Christ, 

and thinking it a small matter that they had been miraculously fed 

for one day, they ask for food for a long period without labour. 

On such terms they seem to promise that they will assent to His 

doctrine." As though they said, " Feed us all our lives, as Thou 

didst feed us yesterday, and as Moses fed our fathers for forty years. 

Then we will believe Thee when Thou declarest that Thou art 

Messiah, the Son of God." So reasoned the Jews, as being animal 

and carnal, when they ought rather to have reasoned according to 

the spirit, thus, "This Jesus has multiplied bread, He heals what-

soever sick persons He pleases, He casts out devils, He raises the 

dead, and does many other miracles which Moses did not do. And 

He does them with this very end and object, that He may by them 

prove that He is the Messiah sent by God : therefore He must be 

truly the Messiah." When Moses gave the manna, and showed other 

signs, he did not do them in order that he might prove that he was 

the Messiah, but only a leader of the people, and a lawgiver sent by 

God. Wherefore the people believed in him, and so accounted of 

him. " Do you therefore in like manner," saith Jesus ; " believe in 

Me, and account Me to be such a one as I prove by My miracles 

that I am, even the Messiah." 

Bread from heaven, i.e., heavenly, in heaven, or in the air, formed 

by angels, and raining down, or rather snowing and hailing from 

thence into the camp of the Hebrews. For the manna came down 

like small hailstones from the sky. The Hebrew of Ps. lxxviii. 24 

is D^Diy P"T 

5 

degan scamaim, corn, or wheat of heaven. 

Ver. 32.—Jesus said therefore, &c. Christ here refutes the 

cavilling of the Jews, and shows that He is greater than Moses, and gives better bread than Moses gave in giving manna. He opposes 

therefore, and prefers His own bread, i.e., Himself in His Body in 

the Eucharist, as He Himself unfolds (Vers. 35, 51, 54, &c), to 

the Mosaic manna, and this in three ways. (1.) The first is, because Moses, who was a mere man, gave the manna, and that only to 

vol. iv. '

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAydX2s9msp2WepSX7HOe7nXXbZEpUfXIUoOPEculZIzotA4WyPikoNf7pHaB1cJ3fr7P9fwBPgw9LY-UM988-BaJUcNq_Xi-reSzw7iRwnbljvWTyNOiCdwEfUcRZErrtVgdavBxg=w615-h900-v0

e2f61a75-aa09-427c-978d-fa4a6822d4a8

210 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

Israel, i.e., to the Jews in the desert : but it is God the Father who 

gives this bread, and that to the whole world. 

(2.) Because the manna was not really bread from heaven, but 

only from the atmosphere, coming down like dew, or hail. For it 

is only the bread of heaven by a figure of speech, as we say the birds 

of heaven, because they fly in the heaven, that is, in the air. But 

His bread, He said, really came down from the highest heaven, 

even from the Bosom of God the Father. Therefore It alone was 

truly heavenly and Divine, of which, in truth, the manna was only 

a type and shadow. So S. Chrysostom, &c. 

(3.) The third way is consequent upon this—that the manna only 

fed the body for a time : but the Bread of Christ feeds and quickens 

both body and soul for ever. So SS. Chrysostom and Cyril. For 

though it be that Christ and the Eucharist do not remove temporal 

death from Christians who communicate devoutly, yet it is the 

cause that they will rise again from death, and after that die no 

more for ever. For the Resurrection is an effect of the Eucharist, 

as will appear from verse 50. 

(4.) Cyril {lib. 3, c. 33) adds a fourth way : that Moses neither 

formed, nor gave the manna, but God gave it by angels at Moses' 

prayer : but Christ Himself forms, and verily gives this bread of the 

Eucharist. For He Himself by His own omnipotence, which, 

together with the Divine Essence, He has received from the Father, 

transubstantiates, transelements, and transforms bread and wine into 

His Body and Blood. 

The true Breadfrom heaven : that is, truly heavenly and Divine, 

not only as regards locality, in that It descends from heaven, but 

also as regards Its nature and substance. For this Bread is Christ 

Himself, Who, because He is God, has a heavenly and Divine 

essence, yea, the same Deity as the Father. 2. The word "true" 

is said because of the manna, say Cyril, Chrysostom, and Augustine 

 

for the manna was only a type of the Eucharist. In the Eucharist 

is reality {veritas), in the manna, the shadow of the reality. 3. True, 

in the sense of life-giving, because It gives life to the soul as 

well as the body, as Christ saith in the following verse. 4. True,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxNiPqztv9x9SvC4jSV6FTOF81ph1gKCZicrqHzlWH7OFk1gOKBlYDWZZmDbxBM2oKCATqU6xE86G6vrsuYija1qfhlc7PWmjjnTIlIEeK1fHdfygVgsXcEl2UGkmVumDLc3fNyGA=w615-h900-v0

471d98e7-7186-4647-ae0f-062043227762

TRUE BREAD. 211 

i.e., perfect, excellent, in which there is all fulness, both of existence 

and nourishment. For all created existences, such as the manna, if 

they be compared with the uncreated Essence, or the Deity, such 

as Christ in the Eucharist, cannot be accounted of as realities, but 

only shadows. In God and Christ alone is there reality (verilas), 

i.e. solidity and plenitude of Being, and of feeding perfectly, like 

(true) Bread. This is what God spake to Moses, " I Am I who Am : 

thus shalt thou say to the sons of Israel, He who is hath sent me " 

(Ex. iii. 14). 

Ver. 33. 

 

For the Bread of God, &c. Christ proves that not the 

manna, but His own Bread, i.e., He Himself, is true Bread, i.e., truly 

heavenly and Divine, by two arguments. 1. Because He alone 

really came down from heaven. 2. Because He alone gives true 

life to the world, i.e., the blessed and eternal life, which only is true 

life. Observe : this Bread is called the Bread of God, because 

formed by God alone, and the property of God alone. Because 

God lives by Himself and His own Divinity: and because this 

Bread is truly the Son of God, and God Himself. 

Cometh down : not in the past, but the present tense. The Greek 

is xarafiuivw, the present participle. The expression therefore signi-

fies the perpetual descent of Christ upon the Eucharistic altar even 

to the end of the world. For whensoever the priest consecrates the 

Eucharist, Christ, who after His death ascended into heaven, comes down from thence to the consecrated species of bread, and in them declares His presence (Se presentem sistit et exhibet). 

Gives: verily Christ is the infinite gift, who is Life Itself, who quickens all the faithful who communicate rightly throughout the 

whole world, and who gives them the heavenly and Divine life of 

grace here, and hereafter the life of glory to all eternity. 

Ver. 34.— They said therefore, &c. " Without labour, in pleasant 

ease let us eat joyfully this Bread, that It may prolong our life, like 

the tree of life in Paradise, that we may reach the years of Methu-selah." For the carnal Jews did not yet understand that the Bread of Christ was spiritual, and thought only of earthly things. "As 

yet," says S. Chrysostom, "they were looking for something material,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwy5Xe2phGtsfR7chKWtrn3VNjMu9Kr308Vak_vM72Ylyka2WeoQDUC9dlMNKh7QwGBFVONSeOlZFhAnMlNde8hb5jzrLFuizSPGfnNCRPayk4Giu1nBCD98bF7O__kcgh4S3rv=w615-h900-v0

1d8c4813-f3c4-4c7c-85f4-8633988e2cd4

212 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

as yet they were expecting the satisfying of their appetite." As S. 

Augustine says, "Give us bread which may refresh, and never fail." 

For as Cyril says, " Although by many words the Saviour drew them 

away from the carnal sense, they profited nothing, nor at all drew 

back from carnality, for when they heard of the Bread which is given 

for the life of the world, they understood it of earthly bread. They 

were like that Samaritan woman, who, when she had heard a long 

discourse of Christ concerning the spiritual water, sank down to the 

remembrance of earthly streams, saying, Lord, give me this water, 

that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw." 

Ver. 35-

 

-Jesus saith not thirstfor ever. Syrian and Arabic, 

for eternity. Here Christ to the Jews who asked for bread to feed 

them unto life eternal, opens It out, and offers It, and declares that 

It is Himself. For He by His grace and Spirit, which He breathes 

into the faithful, so nourishes them that they may live always. But 

peculiarly He feeds them with the Eucharistic Bread, with which 

this whole discourse of Christ has to do. Hear Cyril : " In these 

words He sets forth the life and grace of His most Holy Body, 

whereby the essence (proprietas), i.e., the life of the Only- Begotten, 

enters and abides in us." For Christ in the Eucharist is rightly 

called Bread : (i.) Because by consecrating bread, He transforms it 

into His Body, which under the species of bread, the substance 

being annihilated, alone remains. (2.) Because like bread, It takes 

away hunger, it feeds and sustains life, satisfies and cheers. Hear 

Cyril : " For that was not the true manna, nor that the true heavenly 

bread : but He Himself, the Only-Begotten Son, is the true Bread: 

for since He is of the Substance of the Father, He is by nature 

all-quickening Life. For as this earthly bread has the quality of 

sustaining and preserving our weak flesh, so does He by the Holy 

Spirit quicken our spirits, and deliver our bodies themselves from 

corruption." 

The Bread of life, i.e., living, vital, quickening, yea, life itself. 

There is allusion to the tree of life (Gen. ii. 9). For that wood, or 

tree of life, by its own fruit, would have given life to Adam in Para-

dise. And this life would have been (1.) a prolonged life, extend-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzdlL6-Eu-Fpjh90U_feKBYlAPXMjTEwdvHBPiJloAoFiq3F0oo7zdHz5obqSdag4PUyPARPJZxfscgdv63AJy-zfimSz2EUP08wWz7JKx6QW_roxVWK7ApZg3IGZbI99AIgfaG-g=w615-h900-v0

7fc76dba-9da0-49a5-84ee-40775bc6df60

THE EUCHARIST GIVES LIFE. 213 

iiiT over some thousands of years, until God translated him without 

dying from Paradise to heaven. (2.) A healthy and strong life. 

(3.) One without disease, or old age. (4.) Joyful and glad, for it 

would have driven away all sadness and melancholy. So in all 

these respects does the Eucharist far excel. For It bestows upon 

communicants not only a prolonged, but an eternal life. Wherefore 

the tree of life was a type of the Eucharist, as S. Irenaeus teaches 

(lib. 3, c. 2). Moreover the Eucharist not only feeds and sustains 

the soul, but the body also, as theologians teach. Indeed, S. John 

the abbot. S. Catharine of Sienna, S. Maria Digniacensis, S. Elrulp-

hus, Abbot, and many others, lived for a long time upon the Euchar-

ist alone, without any other food. Moreover the emperor, Louis 

the Pious, during his last sickness fasted forty whole days, in which 

he partook of no food but the daily Eucharist, as is testified by a 

writer who was present. 

He that cometh unto Me, &c. Because I will give him such bread 

as will take away all hunger, and such drink as will quench all 

thirst. Christ having said that He was the Bread of Life, here tells 

us the way to obtain this Bread. This way is that a man should 

come to Him, which means to believe in Him, as He by and by 

explains. For we come to Christ not by bodily footsteps (for so 

the unbelieving Jews, and His crucifiers came to Him), but by the 

steps of the soul, such as faith, obedience, and charity. Shall not 

hunger, " for ever ; 

" for this " for ever " must be understood from 

the " for ever " after thirst. The meaning is, when the manna was 

eaten it appeased hunger, but only for a time, but I, who am the 

Bread of life, bestow upon him who eateth only once in the Euchar-

ist such satisfying fulness that he will require no other food, yea, 

that he will never feel hunger more, because I bestow upon him the 

blessed and immortal life of grace and glory, which fulfils and satis-

fies every desire of man. 

He that believeth never thirst, because I will give him in the 

Eucharist the drink of My Blood, by which refreshed and satisfied, 

he shall never thirst. Hear Cyril : " What then does Christ promise? 

Surely nothing corruptible, but a blessing which we obtain by the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxgwORWB_4ordtNfHgvEgdl-6uNqcu8od6DP-HuZmi769U-ytbacvt-6Bs6uNtPtUHP8GpBDH-Hy3WI9gP3FGPZN2wB61gymZNxCSO6vaM5XBuFagqDfrioRCLK46St-UUf_O2U=w615-h900-v0

dab5bced-9145-4cf5-9f46-afd62a155cc0

214 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

communication of the Body and Blood of Christ. By this we shall 

be brought back to such a perfect state of incorruption as not to 

need corporeal food and drink. For the Body of Christ quickens 

us and by Its participation brings us to incorruption." For though 

it be that the faithful laity do not take or drink the Eucharist under 

the species of wine, as priests do, but eat of It under the species 

of bread only, still under that species of bread they not only eat 

the Body of Christ, but also drink His Blood, because the Blood 

cannot be separated from the Body of Christ, forasmuch as It is 

immortal and glorious. For in things spiritual to hunger and to thirst. 

have the same meaning. And food and drink mean the same thing. 

" He that cometh to Me" saith Augustine, " is the same thing as, he 

that believeth in Me. He shall not hunger means also he shall never 

thirst. By both expressions is signified that eternal satisfying where 

there is no want." In fine, he shall never thirst is that which is said 

in Ps. xxxv. 9, " They shall be intoxicated from the fulness of Thy 

house, and from the torrent of Thy pleasure Thou shalt give them 

drink " (Vulg.). 

Ver. 36. 

 

But I said, &c. Said, elsewhere, even if it had been 

nowhere recorded by S. John. So S. Chrysostom and others. 

Again said, i.e., sufficiently, and more than sufficiently, I have 

shown and proved to you, because ye have seen, i.e., have known, i.e., 

by the many signs and miracles which I have wrought, ye could 

and ought to have known Me. And yet through the obstinacy of 

your minds ye do not believe in Me. For (c. v. v. 3, &c.) He at 

length confutes the Jews, because though they had seen so many 

signs they did not believe in Him. As Euthymius says, "Ye have 

seen Me, or ye have known who I am, both from the witness ot 

John, and the miracles which I have wrought, and the witness of 

the Scriptures which I have unfolded to you ; but voluntarily doing 

evil ye believe not." 

Ver. 37. Every thing, &c. There is an anticipation, thus, "Ye 

will object against Me, ' If Thou knewest that we would not believe 

Thy preaching, why dost thou preach to us ? ' I reply, ' Because 

there are some of you who will believe in Me, namelv those whom

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxu4wJqWhyvgdu5ow5SYkg3Yazf6WWdSJUr5rZTcdPjbS4UdTfbXOhUZWCfOK5ly8aBvNnbdxpqvP4XAUSmKFjgFj89-OCyK6E3FlrILAnaup40WvNxKRdX7QTUgKecx8m9Gg7r8Q=w615-h900-v0

6026155d-e100-4887-be08-30a61635fd79

CALL OF THE GENTILES. 215 

the Father hath chosen, and hath given Me to be My disciples and 

children.' " By this He tacitly intimates that most of the Jews on 

account of their incredulity had not been given to Him, nor elected 

to the Faith by God, but that in their stead God had elected many 

others, especially of the Gentiles. Wherefore He saith, every thing, 

in the neuter gender, which the Father giveth Me, not the masculine, 

the rather to express the universality of all nations. Every thing 

(omne), i.e., all of every nation, every race, every age and sex, on 

whom the Father breathes the spirit of faith, that they may of 

their own free will believe in Me, these by faith shall come to Me, 

and become Christians and my disciples. Wherefore I will not 

repel them from Me, nor banish them from My house, i.e., my 

Church : but you, O ye unbelieving and rebellious Jews, I do repel 

from Me and My Church, and will banish you to hell : but those I 

will lovingly embrace, and take with Me to the Church triumphant 

in heaven. 

Observe : when Christ here smites backward and terrifies the 

unbelieving and captious Jews, He rises to the secret will and pre-

destination of God. For He means to teach that the faith which 

they lacked was God's gift. The Father therefore gives unto Christ 

the faithful from eternity by predestinating, and in time by calling 

them to the faith, after this manner and plan, that being called 

freely by God, they obey the call, and believe, and so come unto 

Christ. For this is the actual cause of faith, or why any one here 

and now in act believes in Christ. This cause, I say, is the grace of 

God stirring a man up to believe, when man of his own free will 

consents to the grace of God, and believes. Therefore the Father 

giveth us to Christ when by His prevenient and co-operating grace 

He causes us to be converted in act, and freely to believe in Christ. 

For as He here says Himself, every one who by the Father is given 

to Christ does in reality come to Christ. So SS. Augustine, Cyril 

and others. 

Observe 

: 

Christ here speaks properly concerning predestination 

to faith and grace, not to glory, just as Paul does. There is an allusion to Ps. ii. 8. " Ask of Me, and I will give thee the nations

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxVJXE6bSV12KAqtQRanHTefrGNifWX8PWY2CCt0IsjGsYejoayGyufMVKYKABUmrXy_cYtegKhCaqxMTOy0x5gV6Xnum983KnSO9EjQeJ7mFuc5UHnakJ0C_7Xcxl4-lMj2aXo=w615-h900-v0

4d1df180-8bf8-40ad-998e-9bc8296ee0da

2l6 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession." 

Wherefore Christ speaks in the future tense shall come to Me, to 

intimate that the Gentiles by the preaching of the apostles would 

come to Him. Hear Cyril ; " He signifies that the Gentiles were 

already about to come ; and He threatens the loss of grace which 

the Jews were about to experience." 

Moreover God the Father gives believers to Christ, because He 

merited this by His obedience and Passion. For the merits of 

Christ are the cause not only of the calling in time, but even of the 

eternal predestination of the faithful. For God on account of the 

foreseen merits of Christ predestined and chose the faithful, as Paul 

teaches (Eph. i. 4), saying, " He hath chosen us in Him (Christ), 

before the constitution of the world, that we should be holy." And 

presently, " He hath predestinated us to the adoption of sons, 

through Jesus Christ, unto Himself." 

/ will not cast out of My house : I will not drive him from Me, 

from My Church, My heaven, but with great care I will cherish him. 

There is an allusion to a host, who receives to His hospitality well-

disposed travellers and friends. As Euthymius says, "HerelmM 

not cast him away from My friendship, nor there from the heavenly 

kingdom." And Cyril says, " He shall not be disappointed, nor with 

shame cast out, neither shall he be deprived of my kindness, but 

he shall be stored in My garner, and shall rest in the heavenly 

mansions, and shall come whither the mind of man hath not even 

conceived." 

Observe : SS. Chrysostom and Cyril {lib. 3, 1. 39) say that they 

who are given by the Father to the Son are those who by a good 

use of their free-will have rendered themselves worthy the vocation 

and grace of God. Pelagius afterwards crudely taking up this 

teaching, denied the necessity of grace, saying that free-will was 

sufficient for him to do good works. But this is an error which S. 

Augustine confutes. " To believe," he says, "is of the grace of God; 

to be able to believe, of nature." Wherefore Christ Himself here and 

elsewhere teaches that all indeed are able to believe, do good works, 

and be saved, because free-will in all is capable of receiving the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxosK9n3Lw4Sb9aOMaO0kHlMwsrTBhwp0pGXADadpIemnURAfswVbbUIsCicnUqyvI09rYlaH5jvl16OkvSsi2K_-wY8g8BMSeWmk191xc3xp6Yb3JdmIz84uqdIQVUkpiV2hUH=w615-h900-v0

2f2d4d71-c22e-4edb-9394-60da26185f7d

THE FATHER'S WILL. 2\J 

grace of God, and often does receive from God grace sufficient for 

salvation : and yet that only those in act believe and are saved, to 

whom God gives efficacious or congruous grace, such indeed as He 

foresees will persuade free-will so that it will co-operate with Himself. 

On this more is said (ver. 44). 

Ver. 38. 

 

For I came down, &c. Christ gives the reason why He 

will not cast out him whom the Father hath given Him, viz., because 

He Himself came in flesh, and into the world, for this end alone, 

that He might do the Father's will, which is, that those whom the 

Father wills to give to Him, and to save, Christ should accept 

and save. This is why He adds in explanation, This is His will, &c. 

Listen to S. Cyril in the Council of Ephesus, profoundly handling 

these things. "When He adds that He was accomplishing not 

His own, but His Father's will, He quells indirectly the madness of 

the Jews, who were always labouring to bring about their own will, 

and holding cheap the Divine laws, and making of no value what was pleasing to their Lord—whilst, I say, He here openly commends 

their prompt profession of obedience, He nevertheless darkly 

rebukes their rebellion." 

Ver. w.—But this is His will, &c. Everything, i.e., all altogether, 

of every nation, rank, age, or sex, as I have said, verse 37. I will not 

lose (perdam), i.e., / will not suffer to perish. He explains what He had said, I will not cast out. This He expounds and completes by adding, but will raise it up at the last day, i.e., at the day of 

judgment, that I may admit (my servant) into heaven, and there 

bless him with immortality and glory both of body and soul for 

ever. Then indeed shall come to an end the motion of the heavens, and by consequence time, which is the measuring of their motion, 

shall cease. Wherefore then shall be the stay and the end of all days and months and years. 

Ver. 40.—And this is the will, &c. He that seeth, Greek, hu ?m, 

t.e., who considers and contemplates the Son, seeing Him with the eyes not of the body, but of the mind, i.e., believing in Him, and obeying Him. Lactantius (lib. 7, c. 9) observes out of Trismegistus 

that the word fcw;2, especially applied to Divine things.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyxEpmReOu-heG4oDJI6zkgpUqK74SnS-TYg8U6uz0C0EdJxw9STw0GF_YUs38PaHk1lZXVNLft827BDebPuCj_pk3avRPtdlGvWbnPqmLFzp3b6Y_AESQBQDky_0vuWv9i3SdJcw=w615-h900-v0

be68335f-ea6b-4936-bf45-a16167d7b798

2l8 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

And J will raise him up : the Greek ctvaerYjaw may be translated 

either by the future indicative, / will raise ; or by the aorist con-

junctive, that I may raise (as the Vulgate has it in ver. 39). 

Christ teaches the Resurrection because " the hope of Christians is 

the resurrection of the dead," as Tertullian says. Hear S. Chry-

sostom {Bom. 46) : " Everywhere He makes mention of life : for 

we are drawn by the desire of it, and there is nothing sweeter than 

not to die. In the Old Testament, indeed, long life and many days 

were promised : but now is promised not merely a long life, but 

endless life. At the same time also He wishes to show that He 

now revokes the punishment produced by sin, by remitting the 

sentence of death, and bringing in eternal life, contrary to the decree 

of the former times." 

Ver. 41, 42. 

 

TheJews therefore murmured, &c. Murmuring at 

benefits, says Cyril, is a sort of ancestral inheritance with the Jews, 

coming down from their fathers under Moses to Christ. Theophy-

lact gives the cause of the murmuring, " Up to this point they thought 

He was speaking of material bread, and listened to Him cheerfully, 

but now when He revealed to them that He was speaking to them 

of spiritual bread, they despised Him, and murmured." They did 

not understand how Christ was Living Bread, and how He had 

descendedfrom heaven, and how they might eat Him, for they craved 

for something for their throats. 

Ver. 43. 

 

-Jesus therefore answered, &c. among themselves (Vulg. 

in invicem). It is intimated that some were for Him, and others 

against Him : and through some attacking Him, and others defending 

Him, they murmured among themselves. 

Murmur not for I give you no occasion of murmuring ; I tell 

you the simple truth, and if on account of its sublimity you do not 

receive it, it is ye who are in fault, both because ye carp at and rebel 

against Me, and do not ask Me for an explanation of My words; 

and also because ye do not ask God for light to understand My 

words : wherefore He subjoins, 

Ver. 44. No one can come to Me, &c. Observe, (1.) Christ might, 

as S. Chrysostom observes, have answered and said, " It is not

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx2PQjdvF8C2vUqt5OtKtEk4i1h8o_8Yo_PZGcnakp7EpKlwk4a6jfwHq80y2lnmoDAxHjTZg6e0_w2EnRWQ7_4b42EJ3kY-Yl0FANRGURrhr-loInnf8qXkB1cAqpcjSUu9A0B=w615-h900-v0

00c26bb8-a5ce-432a-bd4f-4dc6f3dec3c5

MAN'S FREE WILL. 219 

wonderful that you, O ye Jews, neither understand nor believe the 

things which I say, namely, that / am the Bread of Life who came 

downfrom heaven: it is because ye are hard and carnal. But He 

prefers to answer more sweetly and divinely, thus, that no one could 

believe in Him unless it were given them of His Father; that so, those 

who believed might not contend against the others who did not 

believe ; and that the unbelievers might acknowledge that they were 

in want of Divine light, as needful plainly to believe ; and that they 

should ask for this by humble prayer to God in Christ and not mur-

mur, or certainly they would be without the light of God which was 

offered to them. 

The meaning therefore is, "Do not, O ye who believe in Me, 

murmur against the unbelieving, because they do not believe My 

doctrine, which is confirmed by so many miracles ; for faith is the 

supernatural gift of God ; neither can any one believe in Me except 

the Father draw him to believe. But those are not yet drawn of 

the Father. Do not therefore be indignant with them, but ask the 

Father to draw them as He has drawn you. For so will they 

equally with you believe in Me. You too, O ye unbelieving, do 

not murmur against Me, and My words, and those who do believe 

in Me. For the Father has drawn them to believe in Me. Rather, 

therefore, ask the Father that He may draw you also. For so 

will ye, equally with them, believe in Me, and will be of one 

mind with them in My faith, and doctrine, and Church. Say ye 

therefore with the Spouse, " Draw me after Thee," for those who 

are so drawn "will run in the odour of Thine ointment" (Cant. 

i-3)-

Observe, (2.) The word draw does not signify coercion, or 

necessity 

; nor is it opposed to free-will, as if it took it away from 

man, as the Lutherans and Calvinists suppose. Stones and wood are drawn in this way. But with men, it is a man's own pleasure, 

ie., his liberty, not necessity, by which he is drawn. You show sugar to a child, you draw him towards you: you show a green 

branch to a sheep, you draw her towards you. Both are drawn by the enticement of food. In like manner the will of man is

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyUX8a6JqVL4-EIDpewiGoqlrk5yRC5VB_tncoXZoLJ8IAngfiq5h0vifX99vtoSu_SAn0vTNv0LPNFBnj56JTNu6RofE8UgrFQmbxaxVMGIDYg6KXCTAeFNz5_MBsn4iWzV2DJFw=w615-h900-v0

9f2e5f17-d211-4a03-8d1d-6f236d44a33b

220 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

drawn, as iron by a magnet. Thus was S. Agnes drawn to Christ 

by the secret power of His love. " We are drawn," says Cyril, ' by 

monition, doctrine, revelation, ineffably produced." Listen to S. 

Augustine in this passage {Tract. 26). "Do not think that thou 

art drawn unwillingly : the mind is drawn also by love." And by 

and by, " How do I believe of my own will, if I am drawn ? I 

say, it is too small a thing to be drawn by the will, thou art drawn 

by pleasure also. What is it to be drawn by pleasure ? ' Delight 

thyself in the Lord, and He will give thee thy heart's desire!' 

There is a certain delight of the heart, to which that Bread of 

heaven is sweet. Now if the poet might say, 'his own pleasure 

draws everyone,' it is not necessity, but pleasure which draws. It 

is not obligation, but delight. With how much greater force ought 

we to say that man is drawn to Christ who delights in the truth, 

who delights in blessedness, in justice, who delights in life everlast-

ing, which is altogether Christ." And shortly afterwards, " Show 

me a lover ; he feels what I say. Show me one who desires, who is 

hungry, one who wanders in the wilderness, and is thirsty, who 

sighs for the fountains of the eternal country ; show me such a one, 

he knows what I say. But if I speak to one whose heart is cold, he 

knows not what I say." The same writes (Serm. de Verb. Apost.), 

"He said not, He will lead, but He will draw. That violence is 

done not to the flesh, but to the heart, Wherefore then dost thou 

marvel ? Believe, and thou comest ; love, and thou art drawn. Do 

not suppose that violence is rough and troublesome : it is sweet 

and pleasant, the very sweetness draws thee. Is not a hungry 

sheep drawn to the green grass ? And I think it is not impelled by 

the body, but drawn by desire. So also do thou come to Christ; 

do not contemplate a long journey. Where thou believest, thither 

thou comest. For to Him who is everywhere, we come by loving, 

not by journeying." 

The drawing then of God signifies the force and efficacy of grace. 

This drawing is sweet and mild, not compelling the free-will, but 

alluring, soothing, leading it to believe. It also signifies man's 

weakness, and vicious desires, which are repugnant to Christian faith

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyqU798p7mxIpDeUxKJMldu55ngUxg9C5O5cEpVQUAF56i_rksM_v7aWi_UBqLYoAXjZAYmJkQ5tmRYM7B0pTl4GCzz76FB6pNdz4H51C_IVP0Rg7kyyjuAvT-s1bvJg2pgnMYh1g=w615-h900-v0

8914d274-888d-4b6b-81fc-97f385be0704

PELAGIANISM. 221 

and holiness, so that a man needs not so much to be led as dragged 

by the vehement impulse of God's grace to Christian faith and virtue 

This is what Christ saith (Matt. xi. 12), " The kingdom of heaven suf-

fereth violence, and the violent seize it." For the drunkard ought 

to do violence to his gullet, the unclean to his lust, the avaricious 

to his avarice, the ambitious man to his ambition. Therefore the 

drawing of grace lifts to celestial things the will that is drawn down 

to the flesh. It allures the resisting, and strengthens the weak will. 

It makes cheerful the sorrowful, and animates the shrinking will to 

good. Wherefore the Latin Fathers with S. Augustine constantly 

use these words of Christ against the Pelagians to prove the neces-

sity of grace. I do not say the same of the Greeks, as SS. 

Chrysostom and Cyril, and those who followed them, who wrote 

before Pelagius, and therefore speak sparingly concerning grace, 

that they may make much of man's free-will against the Manichees. 

Whence Theophylact from S. Chrysostom says upon this passage, 

" As the magnet attracts only iron, so God draws only those who 

are fit, those who by using their free-will aright render themselves 

worthy the grace of God." This is why S. Chrysostom upon this 

passage must be read with caution, when he says, that those who 

are drawn by God merit this by some foreseen good wish of free-

will. For if you were to understand this of the first drawing of 

grace, and of simple free-will, it is Pelagianism. But if you under-

stand it of a further drawing to greater faith and virtue, and con-

cerning free-will already influenced and stirred up by previous grace, 

it is Catholic doctrine. 

Observe, (3.) Some are drawn by God inchoately, or so far as God 

is concerned, and as far as is sufficient, that they may be converted. 

And yet these do not come to Christ, nor are they converted, be-

cause they are unwilling to follow God when He draws them. And 

without this drawing it is simply impossible to come to Christ, just 

as impossible as it is for a man to fly without wings. Concerning this 

drawing, says Maldonatus, if you ask why one man is drawn to Christ, 

another not, I answer, because the one was willing to follow Christ 

when He drew, the other was unwilling. Indeed some who were

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhilPgHbpfumhBsbla-NVN0TG5eK3rMOOu9So3Zm2yq8JMdwl8pe0rlX7lciBTxCtqpkmQLhPswLsC-b4RkLl7fsEN6SlONo5VX45CBqiErxRZGvqmmOKhQatCJpzN6aZ8dciadQ=w615-h900-v0

3f2ca626-993b-409f-a2e0-18a614058e29

222 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

already believers in Christ taking offence at this eating of His Flesh 

drew back from Him, as John testifies, verse 67. And express 

mention is made of Judas the traitor, verse 71. Have I not chosen 

you twelve, and one ofyou is a devil? But others are fully drawn by 

God, i.e., they are drawn wholly to Christ. These follow God when 

He draws them : and of such Christ here also speaks, as appears in 

the 37th verse. Every thing which the Fathergiveth Me shall come to 

Me. Every one that hath heard and learned of the Father cometh unto 

Me. For to be drawn of the Father means here the same thing as 

to hear, be taught, to learn of the Father. " What is to be drawn of 

the Father but to learn of Him?" says S. Augustine. So those are 

wholly drawn to whom God gives grace, not only prevenient, 

effectual, and congruous (for those of whom we have before spoken, 

who are drawn inchoately, have sufficient grace only), but also 

co-operating grace. Congruous grace is so called, because it is 

conformable to the disposition, affections, and character of those who 

are drawn. Wherefore God foresees that such persons will in fact 

freely consent and co-operate, and so be converted, believe, and 

do good works. Concerning those S. Augustine says, "If thou 

art not drawn, pray that thou mayest be drawn." And "why one 

man is drawn, another not, do not scrutinize, if thou wouldst 

not err." 

Moreover, this effectual and congruous grace is necessary to con-

version, faith, and salvation, not simpliciter, but upon the hypothesis 

of the foreknowledge of God, by which He foresees that this grace 

will persuade free-will, so that it shall turn itself to God : but that 

that other grace which is merely sufficient will not persuade it. 

Wherefore God equally foresees that we will freely consent to effec-

tual and congruous grace, but that to sufficient and incongruous we 

shall not consent, and this of simple liberty of will. This is what 

Christ saith, No one can come to Me, except the Father draiv him. 

Wherefore the great gift of perseverance even unto the end of life 

is congruous grace, and this is the cause of our eternal salvation, 

and therefore has not to do with merit, but is the peculiar and chief 

blessing of God, which He confers upon His predestinated and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxwGdSEcJvr82RtNwneP5mv4sA6RG6ufxmq0ozCt7AMfOXOkUJLjujAwmZB40CPEv8F61WD2h5DGoi8ZMohVIDZmiSbdfR68XbS2PaZrbcN3jNZqtSXinizZkZBo68uQd0_N3GVvg=w615-h900-v0

89f30df2-d974-4954-a0d5-04f55669c77d

GRACE OF CONGRUITr. 223 

elect, and divides and distinguishes them from the non-elect and 

reprobate, as S. Augustine teaches at large (de Predest. Sand. c. 16), 

and S. Thomas and the Scholastics from him, and the Council of 

Trent (Sess. 6, c. 13). Wherefore this grace of congruity ought to 

be constantly and most humbly asked of God, for on it our eternal 

salvation hinges, and God has promised that He will give us what-

soever we ask in Christ's name (John xv. 16). 

And I will raise, &c. Christ shows in this the fruit of this draw-

ing of God the Father: "I will indeed give him who, drawn of the 

Father, shall come to Me, and believe in and obey Me, this reward, 

that I will raise him up to eternal life and glory, that is to say, if he 

persevere in faith and obedience until death." 

Ver. 45. 

 

It is written, &c. He quotes Isa. liv. 13, "All thy 

children shall be taught of the Lord." Jeremiah (xxxi. 33) has a 

similar prophecy, and Joel (ii. 28). Because what Christ said 

seemed strange to the Jews, No one can come to Me, except My Father 

draw him, Christ confirms it out of Isaiah and the Prophets, who 

assert that all the children or disciples of Christ would be taught of 

God. But to be taught by God is to be drawn by God, for this is 

the force of the Hebrew limmude. 

Now, they will be taught by God in that He will at the external 

voice of Christ and His disciples teach their minds inwardly, illu-

minate and inspire them, to believe in and obey Him. Whereas 

previously in the ancient Law, God taught the people exteriorly 

rather than interiorly, by prophets, priests, and by the Holy Scrip-

tures. Wherefore "where God is the Teacher," says S. Leo, 

"there are the lessons quickly learned." Hear S. Augustine (in 

Epist. 1 S. Jo. Tract. 3), " The sound of our words strikes the ear, 

the Master is within. I have spoken to all, but to whomsoever that 

unction speaketh not inwardly, whom the Holy Ghost teacheth 

not within, such depart untaught. The outward instructions and 

admonitions are some sort of aid; but it is He who sitteth in 

heaven who teaches the heart. Wherefore He saith Himself in the 

Gospel, 'Call no one your master upon earth, for one is your 

Master, Christ' He indeed speaks to you inwardly when no mortal

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzyIYX14BeQJN-mX4bbjXQGOxAqg-mJfcBec765wIB-hqqC28HMB9_B2upApIcprg5WMQoiSQ4kY6bgMYRETMFfegyYWT9WI1rvggpJG-TxfEEtj15DkasZAV-_QGPRFV7Ez4F7=w615-h900-v0

dbd44a4d-afb7-4cb5-9a95-a87c4d24370e

224 S - JOHN, C. VI. 

man is by. Where His inspiration, His unction is not, outward 

words are an empty breath." 

Every one who hath heard and /earned, the Arabic adds, 

and knoweth. See how He explains the drawing of the Father. He 

is drawn by the Father who is inwardly taught by Him, i.e., whose 

understanding is illuminated by the Father, and his will inflamed, 

that he may believe in and follow Me. And he hath learned, or he 

does learn, that is, he receives My illumination in his intellect, and 

My impulse in his will : and he acquiesces, and freely consents. 

This man comes to Me, i.e., he believes in Me as the Messiah, and 

obeys Me. For the two feet, not of the body, but of the soul, by 

which she comes to Christ, are the understanding enlightened by 

God, and the will impelled and inflamed by Him. Hence S. Augus-

tine (de Predest. Sane. c. 8) says, " If every one who hath heard and 

learned of the Father cometh, assuredly every one who cometh not, 

hath not heard, nor learned of the Father. For if he had heard 

and learned, he would come." He subjoins, "This school is far 

remote from fleshly sense, in which the Father is heard, and teaches 

us to come to the Son. There, too, is the Son Himself, because He 

is His Word, by whom He thus teaches us : and this He does not 

through the ears of the flesh, but of the heart. There also at the 

same time, is the Spirit of the Father and the Son. And He 

neither refrains from teaching, nor does He teach differently. For 

we have learned that the works of the Trinity are inseparable." 

And after an interval, "Why therefore does He not teach all to 

come to Christ, unless because all whom He teaches, He teaches in 

mercy? But whom He teacheth not, in judgment He teacheth 

them not. For He hath mercy upon whom He will, and whom He 

wills He hardeneth. But He is merciful, and doeth good, and when 

He hardeneth He requiteth justly. This grace therefore which is 

secretly given to human hearts by the Divine bounty, is rejected by 

no hard heart. For for this reason is it given that the hardness of 

the heart may be first taken away. When therefore the Father is 

heard and teaches inwardly that we should come to the Son, He 

takes away the heart of stone, and gives a heart of flesh, as He pro

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwlkHxPQwPdK0YEMoXy39eCuH5nsjeDKPZ90us67Sud_alFwCCMPR2iCf9BmH5Q2hRkaMQf8l4p1FpvK7aMcBc8Y6MopBo49JA5ny7IONWZuzCQ7R73wa3Wmu_rbZ2d1CCJ5D-kjg=w615-h900-v0

0db09ef2-c2f5-4e37-8805-6ad6958b694f

GOD THE TEACHER. 225 

mised by His prophet. For so He makes the sons of promise 

vessels of mercy which He has prepared for glory." 

Ver. 46. 

 

Not that any one, &c. "Lest the dense and ignorant 

Jews should imagine," says Euthymius, "that any one could hear or 

see the Father in a sensible manner, He saith not that any one, 

&c." We must understand, " But let a man hear God unseen, 

speaking in the soul, illuminating it, and persuading to the truth in 

Christ." God is the invisible Master. God is the Teacher, not of 

eyes and ears, but of hearts and minds. 

Save Him who is of God, viz. Myself, who am the Son of God, 

born of Him, and most intimate with Him, who continually see and 

behold Him as He is in His essence. And as man I was indeed 

formed by Him without man's agency, and always enjoy the 

beatific vision of Himself. As Cyril says, " Being consubstantial 

with the Father, He will assuredly see Him from whom He is." 

And as Euthymius says, " Being of the same nature, substance and 

knowledge, He is in the bosom of the Father." 

Ver. 47. Verily, verily, &c. Hath, by right and merit, or in certain 

hope, but not yet in fact. Christ goes back to verse 29, and again 

and again inculcates faith in Himself, because that is the beginning 

of all good : the root of salvation, and the necessary means for 

obtaining from Christ the Bread of Life, i.e., the Eucharist. 

Eternal life : thus He impels those unwilling to faith by a firm 

hope of the reward. For what is better or sweeter than eternal 

life to those who fear death and corruption ? 

Ver. 48.—/ am the Bread of life, nourishing those who eat Me unto life eternal. As though He said, " I give eternal life to those 

by whom I am eaten with true and living faith." He often repeats 

and confirms the same, that He might not seem to have spoken 

rashly, because to the Jews this thing seemed plainly impossible. 

Ver. 49, 50.— Your fathers, &c, in the desert, " signifying," says 

S. Chrysostom, "that the manna did not long continue, nor 

come to the land of promise ; for as soon as they reached it the 

manna ceased." But this Bread of Christ endureth for ever. 

Listen to the words of Josue (v. 12): "And the manna ceased 

VOL. IV. P

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwHEB-Zi9b1Mdc6KUGULUgeDd-LVZ-Cmq48QHOG5jogLJSxpy2u0rXN6qJR0YbdsJDK_DlmPGIW1wFNs3o9ZVd42-LZPe61wnBT6ifiXDD3rSTtSqi0GXMXTqB98C9UD7kY1SYG=w615-h900-v0

3e62b1c0-2866-4a72-afb0-226feb212eac

226 S. JOHN, c. VI. 

on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land 

; 

neither had the children of Israel manna any more ; but they did 

eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year." For as God fails 

us not in things needful, so He gives not an abounding of super-

fluities. 

And died : i.e., manna fed your fathers after the way of other 

food, and neither did, nor was able to protect them from death 

; 

but My Bread will save from death. 

That whosoever shall eat of it, by true faith and living charity, 

shall never die. That is, the manna had not the virtue of pre-

serving life from corporeal death, much less the souls of your 

fathers from death, but this My Bread has the power of freeing 

from death not only the body, but the soul, and that for ever. 

For although it will not prevent the temporal death of the body, 

it will cause nevertheless the faithful man to rise up from that death, 

and to die no more for ever. 

/ am the living Bread (bread is used by a hebraism for food), 

quickening those who eat Me in Myself who am Life, and com-

municating My life to them. Whilst the manna was in itself in-

animate and dead, and therefore could not bestow life upon those 

who ate it. Who came down from heaven (by reason of a Divine 

supposition, says Suarez) ; " Since they sought food from heaven," 

says Chrysostom, " therefore He frequently testifies that He came 

down from heaven." 

Ver. 52. 

 

If any one shall eat, &c. For this Bread gives to the 

soul the life of grace, which endures even to the life of glory for 

all eternity. And It shall make the body to rise from death to 

live together with the soul gloriously for ever. 

Calvin and the heretics contend that this Bread is not the 

Body of Christ in the Eucharist, but mystical food ; for that we 

mystically eat the Body of Christ by faith when we believe in Him. 

Of Catholics the same opinion was held by Jansen on this passage, 

Cajetan, Gabriel, Ruardus Tapper, Nicolas Casanus and Hesselius, 

who are cited by Baronius {lib. 1, de Eucharist, c. 5). Against 

these authors Didacus Castillus has written a whole book, Nicholas

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxPZUXZEm2l0WGGIlJ82SONlREtUhbML-Zizo06ce4_BVDkmDkAjTA1Xfd3T78wZzpPcJ_MgzvjHSktc6PU0Csaxy27OYkD18qbERixDE2EoLCeLpaZnZtRxfQtJkBdwpg-ua6Y=w615-h900-v0

b414c4da-16c8-40fc-ad6f-eb03265d6d99

CHRIST SPEAKS EXPRESSLY OF THE EUCHARIST. 227 

Sanders another, and Toletus, Maldonatus and Bellarmine refute 

them at length. 

I say then that Christ from this place onward speaks expressly 

of the Eucharist. This is so certain that Maldonatus says, to 

deny it is rash, and almost heretical (erroneum). 

It is proved (1.) because Christ here most clearly asserts it, 

constantly bidding us eat His Flesh and drink His Blood, in such 

sort that the doctrine of the Eucharist could not be more clearly 

expressed. For this is what He reiterates over and over again, 

you hear nothing else but My Flesh is meat indeed, and My Blood is 

drink indeed. He that eateth My Flesh, and drinketh My Blood. 

Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His Blood. 

Surely it is incredible that Christ should wish to obscure a thing in 

itself so clear, and by Him so often repeated ; I mean that we 

must believe in Him, by so many words and metaphors about 

eating His Flesh and Blood, especially when He foresaw that many, 

even of His disciples, would for this cause depart from Him. 

(2.) Because He distinguishes both kinds in the Eucharist. For 

His Flesh He calls the food which we may eat : but His Blood 

that which we may drink. Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man 

and drink His Blood, ye shall not have life in you (ver. 54). 

Therefore He speaks concerning the Eucharist, in which we truly 

and properly eat the Flesh of Christ and drink His Blood. Now 

in that spiritual eating of Christ which takes place by faith, drink 

cannot be distinguished from food, nor blood from flesh. Nor 

indeed ought we especially and severally to believe in the Flesh, 

and then again in the Blood of Christ, but it suffices to believe 

generally and fully in the whole Humanity of Christ. 

(3.) Because nowhere in Scripture are the efficacy and fruit of 

the Eucharist, as well as the universal obligation of receiving It, 

clearly expressed and inculcated except here. And this precept, 

since it is so important, and so binding upon all the faithful, 

ought clearly to be expressed. 

(4.) If S. John does not here treat of the Eucharist, then he 

nowhere does so. But who could believe such a thing of Christ's

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwMNw_la5aPcJxNt1mHcTtvU64gB_vFfe4M1WJ5JMvoLa1wCUryN4f5-pvJlMPcCm9XEOmsEp4I_B8JjKV735Jnaf7W-MPUrJSKmQqxXTFXzJgTpPFXwzpA5OKew_0mZVqdklXDqQ=w615-h900-v0

fcf05010-2737-4ac5-a672-ccd82f4cf76e

228 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

Benjamin, who at the Last Supper, when Christ instituted the 

Eucharist, lay upon His breast, who, I say, could believe that he 

should have passed over, and involved in silence this most august 

monument and mystery of the love of Christ ? 

(5.) Because in a similar way {cap. 3), he narrates the institution 

of Baptism, and Christ's conversation about it with Nicodemus. 

So here he relates the mystery of the Eucharist, and Christ's 

disputation with the Jews concerning It. And these two Sacraments 

are necessary to the faithful, and are, as it were, the two bases and 

pillars of the Christian Church. 

Lastly, this is the common opinion of the Fathers, both Greek and 

Latin, also of the commentators and Scholastic Doctors, viz. S. 

Cyril, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, S. Thomas, Rupert, 

Lyra, Maldonatus, Toletus, on this passage, and others in various 

places, who are quoted at large by Toletus, Ribera, Maldonatus, 

Sanders and Castillus, commenting upon this chapter, and by 

Bellarmine {lib. 1, de Euch. c. 5). 

In like manner the Council of Ephesus understand this passage 

{Epist. ad Nestor.), so do the Second Council of Nice {Act 6), the 

Council of Cabillon {II. c. 46), and the Council of Sens {cap. 10), 

and the Council of Trent {Sess. 13, c. 2). Nor does S. Augustine 

dissent, as is plain to those who read him carefully, although many 

think the contrary. For from this very passage he, in common with 

several others of the ancients, maintained that the Eucharist ought 

to be given even to infants. And this was actually the practice in 

various places for 600 years, until the Church laid down the contrary, 

namely that the Eucharist is not necessary for infants, and that it is 

not expedient to give it to them through fear of irreverence. 

Here observe, that S. Augustine, besides the literal and genuine 

explanation of this passage, which is concerning the Eucharist, adds 

another which is symbolical and mystical. And he understands by 

this bread and food the society of the members and the body of 

Christ which is the Church : that to eat the flesh of Christ is the 

same thing as to be incorporated into the Church, to be aggregated 

and associated to it, and so to be brought in to Christ, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwFhvj7nzZYzA3lKGK2QxmlWjPW535nTZIGt25IxD4N6rwnqFJSsNzQEtYDFtHngSVIuOFfMknrUVpfunhtpCaAm8PqgdzsuZ0biMVp3BJVMd82tVDt0po63SNgsYhrxOd15rwcAQ=w615-h900-v0

4367a3b5-8139-499c-930c-70398ac85d7d

S. AUSTIN AND THE MYSTICAL SENSE. 229 

to drink and participate in His Spirit. S. Austin does this on 

account of the Donatists of his time in Africa, with whom he had a 

perpetual controversy. For they by schism rent the society and 

unity of the Church. It may be added the Eucharist is not only a 

symbol, but a cause of this union (societas) of the faithful in the Church. 

For as out of many grains of wheat ground together one loaf is made, 

and out of many clusters of grapes pressed together wine floweth, so of 

many faithful communicants is one society and Church. (2.) Because 

this union and society of the faithful is the end and fruit of the 

Eucharist, which without it profits not unto salvation. (3.) Because 

S. Augustine often just glances at and passes over the literal sense, 

as a thing easy and plain, and dwells upon the spiritual and mystical 

sense, as more obscure, subtle and sublime. Origen, SS. Gregory 

and Jerome, and other Fathers do the same. So S. Augustine is 

explained after his manner by his disciple S. Bernard (Serm. 3 in 

Ps. xc.) " What is it to eat His Flesh and drink His Blood but to 

participate in His sufferings, and to imitate His conversation in the 

flesh? Wherefore also that spotless Sacrament of the Altar sets 

this forth, when we receive the Lord's Body. As that form of 

bread appears to enter into us, so we know by that conversation 

which He had upon earth He enters into us to dwell in our hearts 

by faith." 

You will say that S. Augustine asserts (lib. 3, de Dod. Christ, c. 16), 

that there is in these words of Christ a trope or figure, by which we 

are commanded to have communion in His sufferings. I answer, S. 

Augustine calls this a figure because the flesh of Christ is not here 

commanded to be cut, cooked and eaten (as is done with the flesh 

of bulls and sheep), as the Capharnaites imagined, and therefore were 

offended; but figuratively, i.e., sacramentally. For he thinks that it 

is here commanded that in the Eucharist, by means of the species 

of bread and wine, separated one from another, and as it were dead, 

we should represent the Passion and Death of Christ, which took 

place through the separation of the soul and blood of Christ from 

His body, and that we should both imitate this by mortification 

and shew it forth by holy living.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwohl15eeVlYzKEZR13L_y0_VJaSQeDA6nCO21oEA-7sswYCAzGrFZkV4fE7vC2ZaWzyR546dPsBAEDiVcpZmIaTBRXcfzD_l509RdUytpQd6li5OrQ9kUk8WEc0iwvmE4AqVHzqw=w615-h900-v0

0837100b-ee08-45ff-9530-4201f6abd2e5

230 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

You will say secondly : Christ (ver. 27, 29, 63) treats concern-

ing the spiritual eating of Him by faith, therefore also He here pro-

ceeds to speak of the same, and not of sacramental and corporal 

eating, otherwise He would not speak consistently and logically 

(cohcerenter). I answer (1.) by denying the consequence. For 

Christ wished by degrees to raise the ignorant Jews, and first to set 

before them easy things, and afterwards things more difficult and 

mysterious. Wherefore from the multiplication of the loaves with 

which He had fed the multitude He rises to the manna, and from 

that to the spiritual food of faith: (ver. 27, 29, 35, 36, 40, 47). 

Then in this verse and afterwards (He proceeds) to the real eating 

of Himself in the Eucharist, which is the end, the goal and aim 

of that miracle of the multiplication of the loaves. In a similar 

manner He led on the Samaritan woman from the drinking of material 

water to spiritual water. And Christ Himself sufficiently hints at, 

and indeed explains this leading onward, when (ver. 29, 35) He 

said that bread was already possessed by those who believed, but 

here He says that His Eucharistic bread was not yet possessed, and 

that He was not then giving it, but that He would give it in the 

future. The bread, He says, which I will give is My flesh for thelife 

of the world. But the reason of this change is that Christ (ver. 27, 

&c.) wished to forewarn and prepare His hearers for the most august 

mystery of the Eucharist. For in It faith and spiritual manduca-

tion are required in the highest degree, for without them the real 

and corporeal profits nothing, as S. Augustine says. 

I reply (2.) by denying the antecedent. For Christ did not say 

that we were to eat Him by (per) faith, but He required faith as a 

means for obtaining from Him the heavenly bread and food, which 

is nothing else than His flesh and blood in the Eucharist, as I have 

observed in verse 27, &c. 

They object (3.) that Christ says (ver. 64), It is the Spirit which 

quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing. This I will explain in the 

proper place. 

From what has been said it is clear that in the Eucharist the very 

flesh of Christ is truly and properly eaten, and His blood drank,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwxXMRa8tuo9M843eQ6pGLOinvzlnyp66KMQK_M2LIZwtw42ttK0fwalsFrXwe4o8x-NhkpBNmzm8Q1ZkjHqIiiGCjVGKmMl5_N52amqysHhnXNqoIogA4bEocO7uYRazmWkUhdRA=w615-h900-v0

1525eea2-5bd4-460d-b2fe-20e8375a8f8f

THEOt'HYLACT. 23 

 

and not bread, as the Calvinists suppose, which is only a type and 

figure of the flesh of Christ. For the figure of the Eucharist was 

rather the manna of the Jews, as being something celestial and 

sweet to the taste, than the common arid bread of Christians. 

And if the Eucharist is mere bread, and not the body of Christ, 

then Christ would have no ground for preferring the Eucharist to 

the manna, since the manna was sweeter and better than bread. 

And so the Capharnaites and His disciples understood Christ, 

namely, that He wished His Flesh to be truly and properly eaten, 

although they were ignorant of the manner of eating It sacramen-

tally, under the species of bread and wine. And this they could 

not at this time have received, even though Christ had expounded 

it. And although they were so grievously offended, yet did not 

Christ correct them, when this their offence and apostasy He could and should (debuisset) have done by a single word, saying 

that He was speaking figuratively (myslice), namely, that to eat His 

Flesh was nothing else but to believe in Him as incarnate and 

suffering for the salvation of men. Since, therefore, it is certain 

that He did not do this, it is certain that He was speaking concern-

ing the real and sacramental eating of His Flesh in the Eucharist. 

" Consider," says Theophylact, " that the bread which is eaten by 

us in the Mysteries is not merely a certain figure of the Lord's 

body, but is the very Flesh of the Lord. He said not, The Bread 

which I will give is a figure ofMy Flesh. For by the words secretly 

spoken (arcanis verbis) that bread is transformed through the 

mystic benediction and the accession of the Holy Spirit, into the 

Flesh of the Lord. And how is it that flesh does not appear to us, 

but bread ? It is that we may not shrink from eating it. For if 

indeed It had appeared to be flesh, we should have been disaffected 

towards communion. But now through the Lord's condescension 

to an infirmity, the mystic Food appears to us such as that to which 

we are accustomed at other times." 

Ver. 52. 

 

And the bread which 1 will give is My Fleshfor the life 

of the world (Vulg.) The Greek has, But the bread which I will give 

is My Flesh, which 1 will givefor the life of the world. And so read

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyg34LVTTHWluTsQJIf4BBjRqwa1nbzGOg_mqKHx6vbUCrly411vApnY3gc1IoQ9dOfJh3WmnlOmRUI3BTty0M1ob8im8dFw7Xvh7jNvVYgH8iNZr61-i3FL7AKuEGpj1XgTD44=w615-h900-v0

0b6df35b-971c-4d51-963f-57f3dee0b707

232 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

the Syriac, S. Cyril, Theophylact and Theodoret. The Arabic 

reads Body instead of Flesh. The meaning is, " The bread, i.e., the 

food of the Eucharist, which I will give at the Last Supper, is My 

Flesh which I will give, i.e., will offer to God upon the cross, a price 

and a ransom, to redeem the world from death, so that I may 

indeed raise the world dead in sin to the life of grace and glory." 

Or better, " The bread of the Eucharist, which I will give in the 

way of food for the life of the world, will be My Flesh which I will 

deliver to the death of the cross for the life of the world, but in 

such manner that upon the cross I will give It to restore to the 

world its lost life, but in the Eucharist I will give It for food, that 

the world being raised by My death to the life of grace, may be 

nourished, may grow, and be perfected by It." He means, u 

I will 

give My true Flesh upon the cross, as it were corn in a mill, to be 

broken and ground, that from It might be produced the bread of 

the Eucharist, fruit-bearing and life-giving, feeding the faithful for 

the life of grace, and leading them to the life of glory." S. Ignatius, 

when he was condemned to the lions, had regard to this when he 

heard them roaring, and said, " I am the corn of Christ ; by the 

teeth of the beasts I shall be ground, that I may be found the pure 

bread of Christ." 

From the expression, / will give, in the future tense, all the 

ancients, and the moderns generally, understand this passage of the 

Eucharist, and some add that Christ not only on the cross, but in 

the Eucharist also gives, i.e., offers His flesh to God for the life of 

the world. For Christ not only offers Himself to God upon the 

cross, as it were a bloody victim for the life of the world, but also 

daily offers Himself for the same in the Eucharist, as it were an 

unbloody victim. For the Eucharist, or the Mass, is the perpetual, 

but unbloody sacrifice. As Euthymius says, " He said not, the 

bread which I give, but, which I will give ; for He was about to give 

It in the Last Supper, when He gave thanks, and brake the bread 

which He had taken, and gave it to His disciples, and said, Take ye, 

and eat, This is My body." After an interval, " I will give unto 

death. For He presignifies His crucifixion and voluntary passion."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzDSCSUGrIWHcp6G-OwDXI-r2rSeVEwzlpH8LjhY4vGF0D4IyP3bDZr7UUOSQkQO5k3GoiAa8T4j46T3VKhLuPBj_rx1ynOxYXcFfQoDhEZRJnXXe99GQ4oTUnQoA_haNaUwDg_=w615-h900-v0

69c77578-30b8-47db-8cf9-692dfbca685e

"HOW," A JUDAIC WORD. 233 

Hear also Theophylact, "Although also He is said to be delivered 

up by the Father, yet He is also said to have given up Himself. 

And the one indeed was said that we might learn His accordance 

with the Father, the other that we might not be ignorant of the free 

volition of the Son." 

Ver. 53. 

 

The Jews therefore strove, Greek, ijMayJ>\>To, i.e., 

fought, contended in words, quarrelled among themselves, some 

accusing Christ, others defending Him. 

How: when the question enters in, how a thing is done, unbelief 

enters in at the same time, says S. Chrysostom. " For when it 

behoved them," says Cyril, "who by a miracle had perceived the 

Divine virtue of the Saviour, and the power of His miracles, readily 

to receive His words, and if any seemed too hard to seek for their 

solution, they did altogether the opposite. How can this man, &c. 

S. Chrysostom says, " if thou inquirest this, why didst thou not say 

the same in the miracle of the loaves, as to how He so greatly 

increased them? For from that it ought to have caused this more 

easily to be believed. The expression how, therefore, is a Judaic 

word, and the question of unbelievers." Let the heretics hear this, 

who say, " How can so great a Christ be whole in so small a host ? 

" 

Rather let them say, " How can an angel be wholly in a point ? 

 

" How is God everywhere ? " " How is the soul whole in the whole 

body, and whole in all its parts ? " And if they can neither under-

stand, nor express these things, how can they understand the 

mystery of the Eucharist ? Let them believe Almighty God giving 

assurance of the fact, although they do not understand the mode. 

" God can do more than man can understand," says S. Augustine. 

" It behoves us therefore," says Theophylact, " when we hear, 

Unlessye eat the Flesh of the Son, ye shall not have life, to maintain 

undoubting faith in the reception of the Divine Mysteries, and 

not to ask, By what means?" In like manner Cyril, "But let us 

depart far away from the sins of others, having firm faith in the 

Mysteries. In such sublime things let us never either think, or 

say, 'how?' For this is a Judaic word, and a cause of extreme 

punishment." Therefore he wisely concludes, "When God works,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx3Zus5gl8s80ZSp02ITnqCt5gGlWb_cm9xiCqBjkonHXRkc_J83RPqrboUIMUwfkYiG2EpOze0DWk4HtKsD0ssFsA2mnA8WwP-EuhieN54yRYIQBZK5hpfyW0IxFYP0UFBo8I0KQ=w615-h900-v0

7935d6e0-9465-4ddf-8d17-b55165ff113e

234 S. JOHN, c. VI. 

let us not ask ' how ? 

' but let us ascribe to Him alone both the 

way and the knowledge of His own work." 

Ver. 54. 

 

-Jesus therefore said, &c. Hear S. Chrysostom, "They 

indeed judged this to be impossible, but He showed it to be 

altogether possible ; and not only so, but necessary." " The manner 

indeed in which it was possible," says Cyril, " He did not unfold, 

but exhorted them to ask in faith : but they before they believed 

asked querulously." Similarly Augustine, " How indeed It is given, 

and the manner of eating that Bread ye know not, but unless ye 

shall eat, &c." 

Unless ye shall eat : this is Christ's precept concerning taking 

the Eucharist. Therefore from the very form of the words it is 

clear that it pertains only to adults : although indeed some of the 

ancients have extended it to little ones and infants, to whom they 

actually gave the Eucharist. This appears from S. Augustine {Epist. 

23 ad Bonifac.) and S. Cyprian {Tract, de Laps). Indeed at Constan 

tinople and elsewhere it was the custom to give the remains of the 

Eucharist to pure and innocent boys whom they called out of 

school into the church for the purpose. This appears from the 

case of the Jewish boy which I will speak of presently. But the 

Church subsequently defined that young children not yet come to 

the use of reason, are not the subject of the precept, and but little 

capable of fulfilling it reverently. Wherefore the Council of Trent 

says (Sess. 21, Can. 4), " If any one shall say that the communion 

of the Eucharist is necessary for young children before they come 

to years of discretion, anathema sit." It is otherwise concerning 

the precept of baptism : Unless any one be born again of water and 

the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. For there 

it is plain from the form of words that Baptism is not only com-

manded, but also that it is ordained as a necessity for salvation, 

and therefore that infants cannot be saved without baptism as a 

means, although they are not bound by the precept of it, indeed 

cannot be bound. Others have extended this command of eating 

the Eucharist to little children in a non-literal but figurative sense, 

namely, that the little ones ought to eat the flesh of Christ, i.e., ought

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx6QEk6ca_3D1mVaiEWn-TCN6N57LIVTCIN8ZRcUXVQE5B4Qhdf2Bmeax2cZdqwVUP-eixiz9xkxLYsyBkBpmQxFDgydj_fLHYvBK1ngdZ6-tZcO8h7dAvHlbUfI-CeNHnvajbS=w615-h900-v0

8242d40e-a0ce-4d48-a333-302a1f6fe130

COMMUNION OF INFANTS. 235 

to be partakers of the mystical body of Christ which is the Church, 

that is, they ought to be baptized, that by the faith, hope and 

charity infused into them at their baptism, they may be incorporated 

with Christ and the Church. So think and explain S. Cyprian {lib. 

3, ad Quirin. c. 53.), Pope Innocent I. (Epist. 93, ad Patres Concil. 

Milev.), &c. But this meaning is far fetched and symbolical, 

not literal and natural. 

You will say, infants ought to be united to Christ and the Church : 

and this union is the effect and fruit of the Eucharist, as the 

Council of Florence teaches : therefore they ought to receive It, 

that they may obtain this union. I reply, that infants are united 

and incorporated into Christ and the Church by baptism, but that 

the perfecting of the union takes place in the Eucharist, and is Its 

proper and peculiar effect. But this perfection is not required of 

infants, nor is it necessary for their salvation. So Suarez. 

And drink His Blood. From hence the Hussites, Luther, Calvin 

and others contend that the Eucharistic chalice ought to be given 

to the laity also, that they may communicate in both kinds. But 

the practice and definition of the Church is otherwise, and this is 

the best interpreter of Holy Scripture. 

I reply therefore (1.) that as regards the thing {rem) contained in 

the Sacrament, the laity do also drink the Blood of Christ when they 

receive His Body under the species of bread. Because under that 

species {sub ea) by virtue of consecration, there is there {ponitur) the 

Body of Christ, but by concomitance there is under the same the 

Blood of Christ, for the Body of Christ is not bloodless, nor can the 

Blood of Christ be separated from His glorified Body. As therefore 

he who takes the Eucharist under the species of wine by virtue of 

the words of consecration, takes directly and primarily the Blood of 

Christ, and yet by concomitance takes the Body of Christ, because 

the Blood of Christ cannot be without His Flesh ; so in turn, he who 

takes the Flesh of Christ, under the species of bread, takes directly 

the Flesh of Christ, but by concomitance takes also his Blood. For 

in spiritual and sacramental and divine things food and drink are 

the same : consequently to eat and to drink means the same thing.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy-ypDLhZ9OHfL2XermMFMJI66Yk7phHig2jB190HzopL2nhYAfM4wZ4zKL2t1Exb4jk1FnhWzlTIUxRtjqGP0mYhohO1zk9VrSKLZor_MYO-HZUbPDPc5ENni9FUJyuaRtAkRByg=w615-h900-v0

cd4e6bb1-e36b-4293-8a2e-25b51f364993

236 S. JOHN, C. VI 

Wherefore he who receives in one kind only receives as much profit 

and grace as he who takes in both kinds. Indeed as in material 

things, the same milk is both food and drink, the same bread dipped 

in wine both feeds and affords drink. It is at once eaten and drunk. 

It satisfies at once hunger and thirst. Still, as regards the sacra-

mental species, he is properly said to eat the Flesh of Christ who 

eats It under the species of bread, and he is said to drink His Blood 

who drinks It under the species of wine. 

You will say, then the laity ought to do both, for Christ Jesus 

commands it. I reply that the expression, and drink, both here and 

elsewhere is frequently put by a hebraism for or drink. For it suffices 

to receive one species, because under either is contained whole and 

perfect Christ. Thus it is said (Ex. xxi. 13), "Whoso striketh father 

and (i.e., or) mother, let him die the death." For he who strikes 

either one or the other is guilty of death. The conjunction and here, 

although it disjoins the members of the subject, viz. father and mother, 

nevertheless conjoins them in the predicate, that is to say, the 

penalty of death. Thus also, " silver and (i.e., or) gold have I none " 

(Acts iii. 6). Similar constructions are found in Ex. xxii. 10; 

Ezek. xliv. 22, and elsewhere. So here too it may be taken thus, 

from what Christ says (Ver. 51, 58), concerning bread alone. And 

thus Paul explains Christ's saying, " Whosoever shall eat this bread 

or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the Body 

and Blood of the Lord" (1 Cor. xi. 27). See the Council of Trent 

(Sess 21, Can. 1), Bellarmine, Suarez, Maldonatus and others. 

We may add that also by a hebraism, the word unless ought to be 

repeated, thus, Unlessye eat, &c. , and unlessye drink, &c. That means, 

Ifye neither eat nor drink, &c. This clearly appears from the Greek, 

which for unless has lav fiy, i.e., ifye do not eat, and ifye do not drink, 

that is, if ye do neither the one nor the other. The reason a priori 

is because Christ is here answering the Jews striving among them-

selves, and saying concerning the Flesh alone of Christ, How can 

this man give us Bis Flesh to eati To whom He replies, Amen, 

Amen, i.e., most truly and certainly, except ye shall eat the Flesh of 

the Son of man, &c. But He adds, and drink His Blood, that He

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzRUl_anUUuwyKBOV0soC6-KSbzOr8AkBB5RyfzV-fq5SNHfonmiTW98iFQQarFEDJV-zq10dHlCPx8S_zBJdCcNNIhV_jwWtNz2LYJ6AGQ_wyxVLqmylKLVMBN0ltWBO787jNzGg=w615-h900-v0

e71346f4-a642-4778-af17-b75ee149f47f

COMMUNION IN BOTH KINDS. 237 

may strengthen the expression, unless ye shall eat His Flesh. For 

that is not true and living flesh which has no blood. He would 

also show His liberality, charity, and the greatness of the benefit, by 

which He affords to the faithful in the Eucharist, the complete sus-

tenance which consists of food and drink. These words have respect 

therefore rather to the blessing than to the precept. 

Lastly, there is a canon for the interpretation of Holy Scripture 

delivered by S. Augustine {de Doct. Christ, lib. 3, c. 17). There are 

many precepts in Scripture which are given to the whole Church, 

which yet are to be fulfilled by some, not by all. Such is, " Increase 

and multiply" (Gen. i.) This bids some to take wives, and pro-

pagate the human race, but not that all and each should do so. So 

here, Unlessye shall eat, &c, i.e., unless there are some, viz. priests, 

who take the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both species, ye 

shall not have life in you. For if there be none such, then there will 

be none to consecrate the Eucharist, none to administer it, and so 

the whole fruit of the most Blessed Sacrament would be lost, as 

Bellarmine observes. For it is the office of priests to consecrate and 

receive in both kinds, that there may be not only a perfect Sacrament, 

but also that they may offer the sacrifice. This requires both kinds, 

both to signify perfect nourishment (for the sacrifice is, as it were, 

the food of God) : and this nourishment consists of food and drink : 

as also that there may be a perfect representation of the passion and 

death of Christ. In them the Blood was separated from the Body of 

Christ, as by the force of the words of consecration, the Body is con-

secrated separately under the species of bread, and the Blood under 

the species of wine. Formerly indeed the laity at times, not always, 

communicated in both kinds in the primitive Church. This is plain 

from S. Paul (1 Cor. xi. 28), and S. Dionysius (Celest. Hierarch. cap. 3, 

part 3), and S. Cyprian (Serm. de Laps). But as the number of be-

lievers increased, the Church rightly abrogated this custom, because 

of the peril of irreverence, and various abuses which had been often 

experienced. 

Ye shall not have, &c. That it is possible to have spiritual life, by 

which the believing soul lives in the faith and love of God without

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzvr4aDauX7bqJI9qLGz9I8wmx_PtVadrduWJZvcP_zJaaRyJIDe3ThepKuNT2jQOX-rUn34PH8GNarpcryEqHIuDd3oTPWwzsjcgLkAEcyQzi8ISwyzxEgppCFo5TAst3_e4YWBw=w615-h900-v0

d8c763b1-a134-49e7-8988-54ea3beae66e

238 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

the Eucharist is plain from the case of the newly baptised. Here 

however it is said that there cannot be life without It, because life 

cannot be long retained, nourished and fed without this food, 

especially since the precept of communicating, both by the natural 

and Divine law, as well as human law (for the Church has ordained 

that every one shall communicate once a year, at Easter), urges and 

obliges us to take It. Whence Ruperti says, A man is not con-

sidered to have not eaten, unless he be unwilling to eat, or has been 

careless and neglectful. And we commonly say that a man cannot 

live without food, meaning for long. Hence S. Basil says (lib. i, de. 

Bapt.), " He who has been regenerated by Baptism, ought afterwards 

to be nourished by the participation of the Divine Mysteries." 

Similarly Dionysius Carthusianus, " As the body cannot be sustained 

without corporeal food, nor continue in natural life, so without this 

life-giving food the soul cannot persist in the spiritual life of grace." 

So too Lyra, "As in bodily life food is necessary to preserve life, so is 

this Sacrament necessary to the spiritual life, because it is preserva-

tive of the spiritual life : for as Baptism is a certain spiritual genera-

tion, so is the Eucharist spiritual nutriment." 

From what has been said it is clear that the fruit and effect of 

the Eucharist may be gathered from the analogy of the benefits of 

bread and food. What bread and food do for the body the 

Eucharist does for the soul, and occasionally even for the body, in 

that it nourishes and quickens the body, yea, sometimes heals diseases, 

and drives away peril of death. Wherefore formerly some persons 

when going on board ship were wont to carry the Eucharist with 

them, that they might take It in case of danger ; yea, to ward off peril. 

Thus Gregory, the father of S. Gregory Nazianzen, being worn out 

by a protracted burning fever, and nigh unto death, was delivered 

from it, and restored to life and health by means of the Eucharist, 

received on Easter Day. Nazianzen relates this in his discourse on 

the death of his father. The same saint relates that his mother was 

restored to health from a severe and dangerous sickness through 

receiving spiritual nourishment from bread which he himself had 

consecrated for the holy Sacrifice. He also testifies in a sermon on

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzfUt7_AGnuzzncYPN9EpMvbRwqkGp5UFY__IRCHrm6kv-Fibx9UXV6xCEmY4HHoAfi2uhWBrfr-jdRl2C-p6j0hdPUHaI2jcjaXwWsADAzc7LWovOYmFYuVsXDCP_qaDIwrW2QrA=w615-h900-v0

b79796d6-e80f-4db8-a5e2-39d51ce9729c

MIRACLES WROUGHT BY THE EUCHARIST. 239 

the death of his sister Gorgonia that she was healed of paralysis of 

all her limbs, and excruciating pains, by partaking of the Eucharist. 

S. Ambrose in a discourse on the death of his brother Satyrus, 

relates that he being shipwrecked escaped certain peril of death 

and swam to shore, in consequence of the Eucharist being appended 

to his neck. S. Gregory relates a similar escape by means of the 

Eucharist of Maximianus, Bishop of Syracuse {lib. 3, Dial. c. 36). 

In the time of the Emperor Justinian at Constantinople, the son of 

a certain Jew received after the custom of that age, together with 

several Christian children, the remains of the Eucharist. For this 

he was thrown by his father, a glass-blower, into a burning furnace 

of glass. There by the virtue of the Eucharist he was preserved 

alive and unhurt. This happened A.D. 552. {See Evagrias, lib. 4, 

c. 24, Gregory of Tours, lib. 1, Mirac. c. 10.) Finally listen to Cyril 

summing up the fruits and effects of the Eucharist : " It drives away 

not only death, but all diseases. For it calms down, while Christ 

abides in us, the raging law of our members : It strengthens godliness 

 

It extinguishes the perturbations of the mind : nor does It make 

question of our sins : but It heals the sick, It restores the bruised, 

and like the good Shepherd, who laid down His life for the sheep, 

It raises us from every fall." 

Ver. 55. 

 

He that cometh, &c. Eateth, i.e., says Ruperti, worthily, 

with due preparation and purification, with a previous act of con-

trition and sacramental confession, if a man have any mortal sin 

upon his conscience. For if, after examination, a man be not con-

scious of any mortal sin, even though he may really be in some 

mortal sin unknown to himself, the communion of the Eucharist 

will blot out that sin, and restore the communicant to the grace and 

love of God. This is the teaching of Suarez, and Theologians, 

passim. Moreover, the sixth General Council {Act 8) understands 

this verse of the Eucharist, and asserts that in it the Flesh of Christ 

is called life-giving, because It is the proper Flesh of the Word, and 

hypostatically united to the Word. 

Bath life eternal: because by the Eucharist he receives grace to 

preserve him, and bring him unto life eternal. As Dion Carthu

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxEcySr6SaA466ptggguhsr64GeSiXYl1EmsrXmO7yCrdIhG1cxvCRtL_-e5xAzBkQ4iMP4YQ5jc-CCmGpyS4oY8xpa6tVY7IOilHK0kjaGk0GgNTbWY4ybFjlzerJoNckBAsUGSw=w615-h900-v0

408a83f3-70c4-40a7-9cda-134846302fb4

240 S. JOHN, C VI. 

sianus says, " He hath eternal life, because he hath Me : and he 

hath the life of grace which is continued by this Sacrament, until he 

arrive at the life of everlasting glory." S. Cyril gives the reason 

 

" Because the Flesh of Christ is the Flesh of God, which is united 

to the Word of God, who is, by His nature, Life, and thus is made 

life-giving. The Eucharist therefore quickens the soul, because It 

preserves, feeds, augments grace. Also It blots out venial sins, and 

even mortal sins, if a man has forgotten them. And It will raise up 

the body from death. Wherefore it follows, And I will raise him 

up. Moreover, S. Bernard thus explains these words of Christ 

tropologically (Tract, de Diligend. Deo). He that eateth, &c, " That 

is, he who recalls to mind My death, and after My example mortifies 

his members which are upon the earth, hath eternal life." 

And I will raise him up at the last day, in which the passion of 

Christ and the Sacraments, especially the Eucharist, will gain their 

ultimate and perfect fruit and reward in the saints. 7, who am 

really contained and eaten in the Eucharist, will raise up him that 

eateth Me, that as I give its own glory to the soul, so I may bestow 

upon the body its glory. For the glorified soul requires a glorious 

body that the whole man may be beatified. Hearken to S. Cyril, 

" I, He said, that is, My Body which shall be eaten, will raise him 

up. For Christ is no other than His Flesh. I do not say so 

because It is not different by nature, but because since the Incarna-

tion He can by no means be divided into two Sons. I, therefore, 

He says, who am made man, will raise up those who eat Me by 

means of My Flesh at the last day. Assuredly it is altogether 

impossible that death and destruction should not be overcome by 

Him who by nature is Life." 

I will raise up, to immortal glory. "Lest they should suppose," 

says S. Augustine, "that by that food and drink life eternal was 

promised in such a manner, that those who received it should not 

die in the body, He condescended to meet such a thought by 

immediately adding, and I will raise him up at the last day, that 

meanwhile he should live according to the spirit, in the rest which 

the spirits of the saints enjoy : and as concerns the body, not even

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyj342KJlGUbLiukfzpXNOOV4ubURiH6OAQG2OL9-AmQNuqCKSN1GXbEzIDtuG6dZs1j991ULViNP4LK6aMfM7uJYD4F1A4krLzmm7NRI2_mG2w730KCS6qems8CzJ-QVNotU1n5Q=w615-h900-v0

d373aa65-cfb9-44a6-a726-5ff81d8868fc

THE MEDICINE OF IMMORTALITY. 24I 

his flesh should be defrauded of life eternal, but should possess 

it at the resurrection of the dead at the last day." 

Wherefore the Council of Nice calls the Eucharist "the symbol 

of the resurrection." And S. Ignatius (Epist. ad Ephes.) calls It 

the " medicine of immortality." S. Cyril in this verse calls It " food 

nourishing for immortality and eternal life." Hence S. Chrysostom 

(lib. 6, de Sacerdot.) asserts that the souls of those who receive this 

Sacrament at the end of life are by reason of having received It 

carried direct by the angels into heaven ; and that their bodies, the 

angels like attendants surrounding them, are guarded for eternal 

life. Nyssen indeed adds (Oral. Catechet. c. 37), "that our bodies 

cannot win immortality, unless they have been united to this im-

mortal Body of Christ." S. Cyprian has a similar remark (Serm. de 

Ccena Dam.), also Tertullian (de Resurrec. Carn.) Yea, S. Irenaeus 

(lib. 4, c. 34), from the truth that we communicate of the Flesh and 

Blood of an immortal Christ proves the resurrection, that is to say, 

that we shall rise to life immortal. Understand all these sayings, 

not that by the Eucharist there is confined in the body any physical 

quality, as a cause of its resurrection, nor any supernatural gift, 

which in the way of grace and glory is not due to the holy soul, but 

because the resurrection due to grace is given also to the saints 

by another title, which peculiarly and specially belongs to the 

Eucharist, that is to say, on account of that special union with the 

glorified Body which takes place in the Eucharist because of the 

institution and promise of Christ. So Suarez. Let me add that 

the Eucharist preserves, nourishes, and augments grace, which is the 

seed of glory. The Eucharist therefore is the instrumental cause 

of the resurrection (a moral, that is, not a physical cause), because 

of which Christ will cause us to rise again. Wherefore He saith 

not, " the Eucharist shall raise him again," but, " I will raise him 

again." 

Ver. 56.—For My Flesh, &c, truly, i.e., not parabolically nor 

figuratively, as Euthymius says from S. Chrysostom, but really and 

properly, according to the plain meaning of the words. Hence 

S. Chrysostom (Horn. 61. ad Pop.) teaches that we in the Eucharist 

 °-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxZKq2yRR7eYboBrn3EzVBdkwOE1ZbyDka42OalPRV3ppQIFfokYwmAXe3uyH52sahyrlY2mUaYvg_wKT08pP1cpsEaE2GmboO6Z9XrINHYWO9GwZ54Q2xyzAH6GtKHc1eKn4JYiw=w615-h900-v0

8ee68cc8-69c1-4a96-9f29-db875615c4ba

242 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

are united and commingled with the Flesh of Christ, not only by 

love and consent of will, but also really and substantially. " Where-

fore," saith he, " He hath commingled Himself with us, and united 

His Body to ours, that we should be made one whole, even as 

a body is connected with its head. This is the desire of ardent 

lovers. It is this which Job hinted at, saying to his servants, to 

whom he was beyond measure desirable, because they showed their 

desire, saying, ' Who will give us to be filled with his flesh ? ' 

 

(Job xxxi.) "Not only does Christ afford Himself to be seen by 

those who desire Him, but even to be handled and eaten, to have 

our teeth fastened in His Flesh, and to fulfil every desire. As lions 

therefore breathe out fire, so let us depart from that Table, made 

terrible to the devil, and contemplating our Head in our minds, and 

the charity which He has manifested towards us." 

Ver. 57. 

 

He that eateth, &c. Observe (1.) S. John delights in 

the word abide. By it he sometimes signifies delay, and duration of 

time (as i. 33), upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and 

abiding. Sometimes, however, by the expression abides he ex-

presses, moreover, indwelling and intimate union, as here and in his 

1st Epistle (iii. 9), " His seed," i.e. of the grace of God, "abides in 

him." And iv. 16, " He that abideth in love abideth in God, and 

God in him." 

Observe (2.) the abiding and union of the soul with Christ in 

the Eucharist not only takes place by the Eucharist Itself, but by 

the Eucharist in such manner that Christ being therein hidden, 

really and corporally enters into our body, and so Christ with us, 

and we with the flesh of Christ, and by consequence with His 

Person Divinity and omnipotence are really united and com-

mingled, even as food is really united and commingled with our 

flesh. So S. Chrysostom observes, " He saith, abideth in Me, that 

He may show we are commingled with Himself." And Euthymius, 

" He abideth in Me; he is united to Me by the reception and 

communication of My Flesh and My Blood, and is made one body 

with Me." Theophylact, "In this place we are taught the Sacra-

ment of communion. For he who eats and drinks the Flesh and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzL_DgUQAaRziJhjqvo22QCTSqNzzJRwEjrGh5stMfA3M8Kk9xmMRgxEs8B8Q9nk-2Lzd9AxD2v8ZERox09NLoxk133EWhCes_bB5BjuuXHNUUxEI6P71WoVOdWfRzaPL-QAdPX=w615-h900-v0

9dd5b0a9-99a2-47e6-be40-94a9228d519c

THE SEED OF GLORY. 243 

Blood of the Lord, abides in the Lord Himself, and the Lord in 

Him. For there is a new sort of commingling, and one beyond 

understanding, that God is in us, and we in God." S. Cyril in this 

verse brings forward the apt similitude of wax. " It is as if when 

any one should pour wax into liquefied wax ; it must be that the 

one should commingle with the other throughout. So if any one 

receive the Flesh and Blood of the Lord, he is so conjoined with 

Him*, that Christ is found in him, and he in Christ." And shortly 

afterwards, " As a little leaven, as Paul says, leaventh the whole 

lump, so a little benediction draws the whole man into Himself 

(Christ), and fills him with His grace : and thus Christ abides in 

us, and we in Him. For truly the whole leaven passes into the 

whole lump. And this is the meaning of the passage." The same 

Cyril also declares (lib. 10, c. 13) that Christ is in us, "not only 

through the indwelling, which is meant by love, but also by a 

participation of nature." 

S. Hilary teaches the same {lib. 8, de Trin.), and S. Irenseus (lib. 

4, c. 34). Hence S. Cyril of Jerusalem (Cat. 4. Mystag.) declares, 

that in Holy Communion we become Christ-bearers, yea concor-

porate and united by consanguinity with Christ. Moreover Christ 

really abides with us so long as the sacramental species of bread and 

wine remain in us. But when they are digested and consumed by 

the stomach, Christ ceases indeed to live in us as Man substantially 

; 

but still through that previous union which He has contracted with 

us, the spiritual life of our souls is by His grace fed, strengthened and 

preserved for eternity. For (His Flesh) is grafted into our body as 

it were a seed of immortality. Which seed, as I have said, is not 

physical, but moral, like the merit of good works. For as a good 

work leaves after it merit, as it were a seed of glory, as it were a sort 

of title to eternal life, so does the communion of the Holy Eucharist 

leave a similar new title (jus), one peculiar to Itself, after It, unto the 

same life, as it were a seed of glory in us. For Christ grants this title 

to communicants through contact with, and partaking of His life-giving 

Body. For it is fitting and becoming that Christ should impart His 

own glorious life to those to whom He imparts Himself. " For it

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxobQc2FnyxHvOmbUqoW3kE_U2PveDhpC3iPEmrnqhnoxAlyQeNgwrI52z_QqLH1oKFw2mPaeOBgtX023Xs7u-JCw1qQooPQuoBKypJQhZ2ZsQc9NvOyF2CiyNxzSxhxuYuNS1cag=w615-h900-v0

0660b927-d0ff-436c-a9d1-19f7d6f0e2f4

244 s - JOHN, C VI. 

surely behoved," says Cryil, " that not only the soul should rise to 

the blessed life by the Holy Ghost, but also that this worthless and 

earthly body should, by the taste of that which is akin to it, by contact 

and by food, be brought back to immortality." The Flesh of Christ, 

therefore, in the Eucharist is the moral instrument of the Resurrection. 

Would you learn the physical cause of the same? It is this. The 

Deity of Christ in the Eucharist is the physical cause of the resur-

rection. To understand this from the foundation, observe that 

Christ as God, by the grace given and infused into a man by the 

reception of the Eucharist, even after the Eucharistic species have 

been consumed in the stomach, really dwells in the man, not only 

as in His temple by charity, but also as food in his stomach by way 

of nutriment. For as digested food nourishes and feeds the stomach, 

and through it all the limbs and members to which the stomach 

transmits the food, so in like manner the Divinity of Christ with His 

Flesh taken in the Eucharist, as it were the Food of soul and body, 

because it cannot be digested andconsumedbyman, abides continually 

in, as it were, the stomach of the soul, and nourishes and feeds it, and 

by it all the faculties and powers of the soul. And this is what 

Christ here saith, He that eateth My Flesh abideth in Me, and I in 

him. For the Deity of Christ as it were food abides always in the soul, 

feeding it; and the soul in her turn abides in the Deity of Christ, 

as an immortal and life-giving Food. For she abides as it were in 

Life itself, which feeds us continually with the influx of habitual 

grace, and at stated periods by the infusion of fresh actual grace, as 

by fresh holy illuminations, fresh inspirations, new pious affections 

and impulses sent into the soul, that we may become the same that 

Christ is, says S. Gregory Nyssen. And thus we are made spiritual, 

holy and divine, and that daily more and more, and have always in the 

stomach both of our body and our soul the very Divinity of Christ, 

as it were the tree of life, so that It in Its own time, in the day of 

judgment and the general resurrection, will communicate to us Its 

own immortal, blessed and Divine life. Thus sometimes medicine, 

a long time after it has been taken and digested, through the virtue 

which it leaves after it, works and heals, even though it at first makes

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyjfJGXNLJ11zDqnBI_BQEv2GpB1WdRAFGrGgF8drBSWyKbN3VjTnnsTUrTj20fwOx0WckBygv3qpyUnfn031nsewZyUu_kde-NvbmQDBD7PKa5-RwdZlAIxtwirbv8hWFWvvG40w=w615-h900-v0

7b8cb23b-5bb4-4c89-9855-c899b90e6051

MORAL CAUSE OF THE RESURRECTION. 245 

those who take it more sick, because it attacks the depraved humours 

(of the body), and fights with them until it purges and expels them 

; 

and when they are expelled, it restores the body to its pristine purity 

and health. 

The following is the order of things in the communion of the 

Eucharist. (1.) Through the receiving of the Eucharist, the Flesh and 

Blood of Christ, yea whole Christ, i.e., His Humanity and Divinity, 

as it were food, enters into us, and abides in us. (2.) The species of 

the Eucharist being digested by the stomach, and converted into our 

flesh (for the matter of the bread and wine which had been anni-

hilated in consecration, comes back by the power of God), the Flesh 

and Humanity of Christ cease to be in us : but the Divinity of Christ, 

as it were immortal Food, remains in us. And This (3.) communi-

cates Its own eternal life to the soul, nourishes and augments it by 

continually feeding in the way of which I have spoken. (4.) The Same 

will raise our bodies from death at the resurrection, and unite them 

to our souls, and so bestow the life of eternal glory upon the whole 

man, inasmuch as we have the Eucharist, at least as regards the 

Divinity of Christ which it contains, as it were the food and medicine 

of immortality always in our body and our soul. And by means of 

It Christ abides in us, as He Himself here asserts, inasmuch as He 

is very God. But God will be the physical cause of our resurrection 

as the Flesh of Christ will be the moral cause of the same. And 

although our flesh must first die, even as the Flesh of Christ died, 

yet this food of the Eucharist, that is, Christ as God always abiding 

in a man, will raise him up from death unto life eternal. This is 

what Christ saith, And I will raise him up at the last day. 1 am 

the living Bread who came downfrom heaven. If any man shall eat 

of this Bread he shall livefor ever. For Christ as God, not as man, 

came down from heaven. He that eateth, &c.—because as food It 

always sustains and nourishes him into eternal life. Nor indeed 

can these words be otherwise explained. As therefore food, after 

it has been digested, leaves its power to nourish in the chile 

which remains, so the species of the Eucharist after they have been 

digested, leave in a manner their power of nourishing unto eternal

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzJT5B2NhcTyntY5tEQclQAkfmIQ8Ino-frd4Y73Y1ogBcKHKLcR9X3dBuj-cM0KOu76eIV-nBye5DZ_nmmLNKbzWlRwdA5ISE3WLbpp9HjLG7cn3dsadoVuUCTDnxE1xBSPKJOpA=w615-h900-v0

0cfc5b1a-9035-4c1e-825f-96063b5198aa

246 s. joiin, c. vi. 

life in the Divinity of Christ which with grace remains. For His 

Humanity by His own ordinances has been tied to the species of 

bread and wine, that so long as they remain, It also should remain, 

and when they are consumed that It should cease to be present, as 

S. Thomas and the rest of the Theologians teach. In like manner 

after a good work there remains in us not only habitual grace, 

but also the Divinity Itself, and the Whole Most Holy Trinity, 

which makes us to be partakers of the Divine nature, and sons 

of God. 

Here observe by the way a threefold distinction between the 

Eucharist and common food. (1.) The first is that common food does 

not remain in us, but is converted into chile, and then into blood, 

and then into the flesh and substance of our several members. But 

in the Eucharist the Flesh of Christ is not converted into the sub-

stance of him who eateth, but remains uncorrupt and unchanged in 

Itself, forasmuch as It is immortal and glorious. This is what 

Christ said to a certain Saint, " Thou shalt not change Me into thy-

self, but thou shalt be changed into Me." 

(2.) The second is, that common food is of itself without life, but is 

animated, and receives life from him that eateth it. But the Flesh 

of Christ in the Eucharist is both living and life-giving, giving life 

to him that eateth It. 

(3.) Bread and food leave behind no part of themselves, because 

they are wholly converted into chile, and transfuse into it their 

power of nourishing. But the Flesh of Christ in the Eucharist, after 

the species being consumed, the bread has vanished, leaves after It, 

Its own hypostasis, that is to say, the Person of the Word, and His 

Divinity, on account of which Christ is here said to remain in him 

that eateth, and to raise him up, and he that eateth to remain in 

Christ. So Cyril and the Fathers cited above. Also S. Ambrose 

(lib. 6, de Sacrament, c. 1), whom hear. " How then did the Bread, 

even the Living Bread come down from heaven ? Because the same 

our Lord Jesus Christ is a partaker both of Deity and of a body; 

and thou who receivest His Flesh, art partaker through that Food 

of His Divine Substance." So too, S. Hilary {lib. 8, de Trin.)

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAySOX7FOWPvMJX4kS-y4VBSYHyjpkv4DfQtZasf1NlX4uem5cK1_W6sW9gUMqGu0z7nykRkTxo0pGQ51B3L4Li5zI76n1TMk0V4fK6Z9iQjLuQPPJ__9xSCQBY6LaxgOoQva6t8=w615-h900-v0

76c3dc01-83bc-402d-ae29-659b40081e01

THE LIVING FATHER. 247 

"He Himself is in us through His Flesh, whilst we are with Him 

in This which is in God." 

Ver. 58. 

 

As the living Father, &c. . . hath sent Me, in the 

Flesh into the world, through the Incarnation, for the salvation of 

men. The living Father, who is Himself Divine Life, uncreated 

Substance, and therefore in begetting Me hath communicated to 

Me the same Substance, that I might communicate the same to the 

Humanity, which He sent Me to assume, that I might communicate 

similar spiritual, holy, blessed and eternal life to the faithful who 

eat of Me. 

And I live because of (propter) the Father, i.e., through the Father, 

of the Father. For the Father in begetting Me communicates to 

Me His own Divinity, which is the essence of life. For God hath 

begotten God, the Living One hath begotten the Living One. 

" The Son therefore," saith Cyril, " is as Light of Light, and as Life 

of Life. And as the Father gives light through the Son to the 

things which need light, and through Him does wisely, so through 

the Son as through His life which proceeds from Him, He quickens 

those things which have need of life." And again, "I live by 

(propter) the Father : for since My Father is Life by nature, and 

because I am by nature His Son, I naturally possess this property 

of His nature, that is life." 

Here Christ gives the reason by which He is living and quicken-

ing Bread in the Eucharist, who will raise us from death at the 

judgment-day. And He opens out the very origin and fountain of 

life and resurrection. For God the Father is that Fount of life, 

according to the words, "With Thee is the Fountain of life" 

(Ps. xxxv. 10). And He communicates together with His Essence 

this life to His Son, whereby it comes to pass that the Son Himself 

is a Fountain of Life. Wherefore as the Father always abides in 

the Son, always imparts this source of life to the Son, so also the 

Son, being sent by the Father in the flesh, and abiding in it, con-

tinually infuses this Divine life into the flesh and the Humanity 

which He has assumed, and continually abiding in us, inspires the 

like life into us who receive His Flesh in the Eucharist. He there-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzMVwRvPBlgYlcZklUbrX386Yg3wIAZOPD5-zBErRZ4r1MeeIJvdWxQobNrUq5BIEABuQnl3qXF7sY4UGgLGkm_pYL4JpyjjtgEvdKPFJ1EU8FZ3oMqxBa1-3GIGlWHVzt3sbgPfg=w615-h900-v0

4ef23449-72fc-45df-8171-84ab63aa75df

248 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

fore shall live by Me, that as the Father communicates His own life 

to the Son, so Christ communicates His life to the Christian who 

rightly receives Him. Wherefore S. Dionysius the Areopagite {de 

Eccles. Hierarch. c. 1) teaches that the Priest passes into fellowship 

with the Godhead, and (c. 2) that communion deifies, and (c. 3) 

that those who worthily communicate are by the similitude of a pure 

and divine life grafted into Christ. Moreover, the Eucharist does 

the same thing for the pure and the penitent. Whence S. Augustine 

{Serm. 1, de Temp!) says, "Let him change his life, who wishes to 

receive Life. For if he change not his life, he will receive Life unto 

condemnation, and will rather be destroyed than healed by It 

 

rather slain than quickened." For the impure and the impenitent 

receive not life, but death of body and soul, both now and eternally, 

from the Eucharist. Thus S. Cyprian {Serm. 5, de Laps.), speaking 

of a woman who communicated unworthily, says, "She received not 

bread, but a sword, and as it were taking some deadly poison she 

was shaken, trembled, and fell. She who had deceived man, felt the 

vengeance of God." He relates several cases of a similar kind. 

Durandus also {Ration. Divin. Off. lib. 6, c. 10) relates that the 

pestilence which ravaged Rome, from the time of Pope Pelagius 

until Gregory the Great, and caused many thousand deaths, was 

sent by God in punishment of those, who, after the Lenten fast and 

the Easter communion, returned to their former wickedness. For 

they were to be visited with death who profaned the Eucharist, 

which is true life. 

The meaning then is, "As the Father, who liveth by Himself, 

and is the Essence itself of life, hath sent Me into this world, and I 

have life from Him who begat Me, life, I say, both human, from a 

human soul, and of greater importance, Divine life, through par-

taking of the Godhead, with which My humanity is hypostatically 

united, and will be united for ever, so in like manner he who eateth 

the living Me, also from Me, ever abiding in Him as regards My Godhead, shall receive a perpetual life of grace and glory ; and as 

regards his body. I will in due time raise it up into a blessed and 

eternal life." Christ here signifies that the life which is originally in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyrp2_n-g1lJxwPmp9QFAVTu6Ag1xG-d8v6XYLgShBjTJ9-7KV2CL0ip1WHKkxFQp0TOcafCYtykoH6EpxzKCcDCoM0-vv8M7y6bboAGL0TdpFEtT3qbvo1yqwX2ayRM1tB3T7bNw=w615-h900-v0

efa7f6fb-67fe-4a09-a170-fb0130386adf

SIMILE OF RED-HOT IRON. 249 

the Father is communicated to us through the Son and the 

Eucharist, as by an organic means. So Leontius, Jansen, and 

others. But above the rest, S. Cyril, whom hear, " As I am made 

man by the will of the Father, who came forth from essential life, 

and as being man I live, and have filled My body with Life, no 

otherwise shall he who eateth My flesh live by Me. For I assumed 

mortal flesh ; but because I exist as life essentially, dwelling in the 

flesh, I have made it wholly like unto My own life. For I indeed 

am not conquered by the death of the flesh, but as God I have over-

come all death and destruction." And shortly afterwards, " As the 

Father hath sent Me, so that I am become man, yet I live by the 

Father, that is, I perfectly preserve the Father's nature : so he who 

shall receive Me by eating My flesh shall surely live, being made 

wholly like unto Me, who am able to give him life, because I am of 

the living Father." He adds a simile taken from red-hot iron. For 

as the fire communicates its heat to the red-hot iron, so does the 

living Christ impart His life unto us in the Eucharist. In admira-

tion of this S. Augustine exclaims (lib. 7, Confess, c. 10), " O eternal 

Truth, and true Charity, and sweet Eternity, I tremble with love 

and dread, as though I heard Thy voice from on high saying, ' I am 

the Bread of the strong: grow as thou shalt eat Me.'" 

Observe here the gradation, by which life gradually descends to 

us from God as it were by stairs. The first step is, the Father com-

municating His own Divine Essence to the Son. The second, when 

the Son communicates the same life to the Humanity which He assumed by the participation of attributes. Third, when He inspires 

the life of grace and glory which He shares with It. The fourth, 

when He infuses not equal but like life into us in the Eucharist. 

Lastly, Christ here signifies what I have spoken of in the pre-

ceding verse, that His Godhead which always abides in us, after the 

reception of the Eucharist, even after the species have been con 

sumed, continually causes the life of grace to flow into us, and will 

after death raise us up again unto immortal life. This is what He means when He saith, I live by the Father, &c. He means, Because 

I receive Godhead, which is pure life from the Father, therefore he

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyKSjw_7iLvB2GKTH6e6fb_06v968YU9uS5ZpRxFZ_j3ndfSli4rFvVCWgrRmAw-hqQtVBKsniBTTarP_i4fkNWXT1V_LdEug6JpR4yMxKEHEl4GiRiVD7RUF1JfRLalBVCZJA6sA=w615-h900-v0

03a83824-96d1-4bb0-84bc-46e327cba505

250 S. JOHN, C. Vi. 

that eateth Ale, even he shall live by Me. For My Godhead abiding 

in him, will continually breathe into his soul the breath of life. 

And his body shall after death be raised up by It to the beatific 

life. It is as the seminal virtue which lies hid in the heart of a 

grain of wheat, that seems dead through the winter, but in spring 

by the heat of the sun opening out its force, it, as it were, raises the 

grain of wheat itself from death, and causes it to germinate, and 

produce thirty and sixty fold. 

Ver. 59.— This is the bread, &c. He intimates the same thing 

which I have said at the end of the foregoing verse. For Christ 

came down from heaven not as man, but as God. Wherefore he 

who eateth Him in the Eucharist shall live for ever, because in truth 

he eateth God and the Godhead, which being ever present with 

him who eateth, continually breathes into him His own life. Hear 

S. Ambrose {Serin. 18 in Ps. cxviii.), " How shall he die whose food 

is Life ? " And presently, describing its wonderful effects, " Draw 

nigh unto Him, and be filled, for He is Bread. Draw nigh unto 

Him, and drink, for He is a Fountain. Draw nigh unto Him, and 

be enlightened, for He is Light. Draw nigh unto Him, and be 

free, for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Draw 

nigh unto Him, and be absolved ; for He is remission of sins." 

And S. Bernard (Serm. de Ccena. Dom.) says, " Two things that 

Sacrament worketh in you : it diminishes the sense (of sin) in the 

least matters, and in graver sins it wholly takes away consent." 

And again he says, " If any of you feel neither so frequently nor so 

severely the motions of anger, envy, lust, and such like passions, 

give thanks to the Body and Blood of the Lord, forasmuch as the 

virtue of the Sacrament worketh in you." And S. Chrysostom on 

Ps. xxii. 5 (Vulg. ), saith upon the words, " Thou hast prepared a 

table before me, against them that trouble me," "Let those who 

have trouble of the flesh come to the table of the Mighty One, 

and tribulation shall be turned into consolation." Lastly, S. Cyril 

says, " The body of Christ quickens, and by our participation of it 

restores us to incorruption. For it is the body of none other than 

of the Life itself. It retains the virtue of the Word Incarnate, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzCH4U9wbkZol1pO-u3Ix8JzrN0SqY8uLFjRLKa9xh5hGpv_sDi_2NMzxZFYSmVlyji5zjoN-UoGO7XCUG3nIDgxNfnUzia45XIw4OrRtxzlengGOwKJJfrhPzDeAXb-yNONgspDA=w615-h900-v0

da9d2293-edd6-4fc1-a4db-783076bc3cec

ERROR OF THE JEWS. 25 I 

is full of the power of Him by whom all things live and have 

their being." 

Ver. 60. 

 

This spake He, &c. Christ taught these things, not in 

secret, not in a corner, but publicly in the synagogue in the presence 

of the Scribes, the Priests, and the whole people who had flocked 

together. For the synagogue was a sort of church. 

In Capharnaum, " where," says S. Chrysostom, " He had done 

so many miracles, and where He had the best right to be heard. 

Because the things which Christ spake concerning eating His flesh, 

and His being about to raise us up from death unto life eternal, 

seemed paradoxical and incredible to the Jews, He wished to pro-

claim them from that place, where by His many miracles He had 

gained faith and authority for Himself and His doctrine." 

Ver. 6 1 

. Manytherefore went back. Hard, i.e. , austere, rigid, oppres-

sive, unmerciful. The Arabic has difficult ; Euthymius, can scarcely be 

admitted. And who can hear it ? " Who can," we do not say, ' do 

such a thing, but even bear to hear it ? " What Jesus said concern-

ing His Flesh, and especially the command to eat It (ver. 54), 

except ye eat, &c, seems too difficult to be believed, and too horrible 

to be done. For what butcher will slay Christ ? Who can bear to 

eat human flesh, or drink human blood ? These are the feasts of 

cannibals, such as the heathen who did not understand the mystery 

of the Flesh of Christ in the Eucharist in after times reproached 

Christians with, and so were imitators of those Capharnaites, as 

Tertullian and other Fathers testify. 

This saying was not hard in itself, but hard to the stupid Jews, 

who imagined that the Flesh of Christ was to be cut by a butcher, 

and mangled by the teeth like the flesh of an ox. But they greatly 

erred, for Christ neither said this, nor meant it. But He wished us 

to eat His Flesh sacramentally, i.e., hidden in the Sacrament under 

the species of bread and wine, a thing which is not dreadful, but 

which we who daily offer and communicate find by experience to 

be most easy and sweet. The Jews ought therefore humbly to have 

asked Christ to unfold to them the manner of doing this. If they 

would have done this, they would have heard it, and might have

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwYGvW-u87u_g4QcgmDrNhMpx-ZN1jmGQi4ASGTzsdDnJXae81tes6oOfiGowUMr_a5CqokBw70gV8ztKFGQRJmsYJfb4i3i8rGGZDjTrXPWd-OP4PA6vbeWUHdsVRXUq51C706dg=w615-h900-v0

9585a4ed-ef78-4ea0-a063-60a17e8338bc

252 S. JOHN, C. VT. 

received it, and not thought the saying hard. As Cyril says, " They 

thought that they were called to the savage manners of wild beasts, 

and were urged to eat raw human flesh, and drink blood, things too 

horrible to hear of. Such were their thoughts as to how the flesh of 

this man would bestow eternal life, and bring them to immortality." 

Ver. 62. 

 

-Jesus knowing in Himself, Greek, h iaurdj, Syriac, in 

His soul, i.e., through His omniscience, without any one to tell, or 

reveal it. " For this was a proof of His Divinity, that He revealed 

secrets," says Chrysostom. That His disciples murmured at this, He saith unto them, Doth this scandalizeyou ? As though he said, " I do 

so many and wonderful things because I am sent by the Father for 

this purpose, as I have proved to you by My miracles 

; 

ye ought 

not therefore to be scandalized and offended at My words and deeds, 

but ye ought rather to ask God who sent Me for light and grace, 

that ye may be able to receive them." 

Ver. 63. If therefore ye shall see, &c. " He is speaking," says 

Euthymius, " concerning His future assumption into heaven." For 

some of them, such as the Apostles, beheld this. And others, who 

did not believe, although they saw it not, might have heard, and 

certainly learnt from those who did see. 

Where He was before, as regards His Divinity, says Euthymius. 

For He ascended into heaven, as regards His humanity. What 

willye say, must be understood, as Euthymius observes. " Will ye 

be still scandalized ? I trust not. Certainly I know ye will not 

rightly be so. For by My ascension into heaven by My own power 

ye will be able to know that I came down from heaven, and that 

I return whither I was before, and therefore that I am not only true 

and a prophet, but that I am also God, and the Son of God, to 

whom all things are possible, yea easy, and therefore that I am able 

to give My Flesh for food, and by It to raise the dead. From the 

miracle of His ascension into heaven Christ rightly proves His 

Divinity and omnipotence, and from them the mystery of the 

Eucharist. For to the Deity nothing is impossible, nothing strange, 

nothing paradoxical. Yea, it is becoming to Deity to do things 

strange (nova) and paradoxical, which are above nature and human

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy71Gl6euc3wYPoNtLOADpj8UEK01jW5yYpwfhXBcyvCBTCmR53vtw2qkOsN3aTuko5i9natzcqbm6sRcyvxJ3KyWLKHGrLNJdFA14uWdXv7XsZYT7iv_-42wP13BKZYVcGS32H=w615-h900-v0

b4097220-5588-4e8a-a4c1-87f7244b4349

ERROR OF CALVIN. 253 

reason. As S. Cyril says, " By another wonderful thing He urges 

them to faith," and that appositely. For the ascension of Christ 

into heaven signified that He came down from heaven (for He went 

back from whence He came), and therefore that He was the Living 

Bread which came down from heaven, which was what He here 

wished to persuade the Capharnaites. 

Maldonatus explains otherwise, thus, " When ye shall hear that I 

have ascended into heaven, what will ye say ? Surely ye will be 

still more scandalized 

; ye will still less believe Me 

; 

ye will say that 

I am a sorcerer, who by the aid of the devils have pretended to fly 

into heaven." 

Ver. 64. 

 

It is the spirit which quickeneth : theflesh, Arabic, the body, 

&c. The Calvinists bring forward against us these words of Christ 

to show that in the Eucharist there is not the Flesh of Christ really 

and corporeally, but only spiritually and figuratively by representa-

tion and faith, because, say they, the flesh profiteth nothing. But 

if this be true, then in vain was the Word made Flesh, then in 

vain did the Flesh of Christ suffer and was crucified, and died. 

God forbid. And who does not see that the Flesh of Christ is more 

profitable than the mere bread of Calvin, even though it were 

seasoned with sugar and honey out of Calvin's throat ? For in his 

bread there is no spirit, except the spirit of error and satanic 

madness. 

First then SS. Cyril and Austin learnedly expound these words, 

thus : they are as if Christ said, " My Flesh alone profits not to 

preserve him who eats It unto life eternal, because it is not My mere Flesh which confers life and resurrection, but it is the Spirit, 

i.e., My Divinity united to the Flesh which quickens first the soul, 

and then the body at the Resurrection. And thus My Flesh 

profiteth very exceedingly, forasmuch as being united to the 

Spirit of the Word, it derives from It its quickening power." By 

a similar form of speech we are wont to say, The eye doth not 

see, the ear doth not hear, nor the body feel, but it is the spirit, *'.<?., 

the soul, which sees through the eye, and hears through the ear. 

Consequently, the words, i.e.,, the reality and the mystery of My

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxCi2ecQrOn4vuR4ZA9sMtdgX-8yQKWCcX4BFxMez_Yas1lGd4R7PHqre395ry3raWtNmhm1hNgv9m5UeS3rZfFPmvzyjv5VhvutkZnCuuCMUT77fFOLmYbhPIsj2HYxsGistd88g=w615-h900-v0

90a60d45-7b66-4f87-bad6-93497b12b903

254 S. JOHN, c. VI. 

Flesh to be eaten in the Eucharist, which 1 speak unto you are 

spirit and life. That is, My Deity, which is a pure Spirit, is a 

living and quickening Spirit. For It will give you life in the 

Eucharist, not My bare Flesh. So S. Augustine says, " This Flesh 

alone profiteth not, but let the Spirit be joined to the Flesh, and 

It profiteth greatly. For if the Flesh profiteth nothing, the Word 

would not have become Flesh." The same {lib. 10, de. Civil. Dei) 

says, "The Flesh of itselfcleanseth not, but through the Word by which 

it hath been assumed." And S. Cyril, " If the Flesh be understood 

alone, it is by no means able to quicken, forasmuch as it needs a 

Quickener, but because it is conjoined with the life-giving Word, 

the whole is made life-giving. For the Word of God being joined 

to the corruptible nature does not lose Its virtue, but the Flesh 

itself is lifted up to the power of the higher nature. Therefore, 

although the nature of flesh as flesh cannot quicken; still it doth 

this because it hath received the whole operation of the Word." 

For Christ is here making answer to the Capharnaites murmuring 

as to how Christ's Flesh being eaten could give eternal life. But 

He gave this answer because they had murmured still more con-

cerning the eating the flesh of Christ, and the method of 

doing so, which they thought of as something carnal and barbarous, 

as is seen by verses 52 and 60, and 61. For it seems something 

savage and inhuman to tear like wolves, and devour the human 

flesh of Christ. Hence secondly, 

More aptly and naturally, the flesh, i.e., the carnal understanding, 

by which in sooth ye suppose that My Flesh is to be visibly cut 

and eaten like the flesh of sheep, profits nothing for the bestowal 

of everlasting life : but the spirit and the spiritual intelligence, 

by which we believe that the Flesh of Christ united to His 

spiritual Divinity, i.e., in a sacramental manner, veiled and 

hidden in the Eucharist under the species of bread and wine, is to 

be eaten—this gives life to soul and body. So S. Chrysostom, &c. 

No otherwise is S. Augustine's meaning on the 98th Ps. (Vulg.), if 

he be carefully read : He says, " It is not this body which ye see 

nor the blood which those who crucify Me will shed, that ye are

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzbq_motHnUDf1UPV3aBtoMLsJtBmIgo8ZLh3SPLcJU_fS8rydQIIWGRJtDaM8-wBoUAnujkhKja-x8ptZYZfyNAUhqSSiOmaEwz1oe_36KYyGU1T66RBOYBD5pVby4qbiEKspE4w=w615-h900-v0

05d713c7-e947-4a21-b8f4-56f6e835d990

COMMENT OF S. AUSTIN. 255 

about to eat and drink. I commend unto you a sacrament which 

spiritually understood will quicken you. And although it be 

necessary that it be visibly celebrated, yet it ought to be understood 

in an invisible sense." These words the Calvinists understood 

thus, that in the Eucharist we eat the Flesh of Christ not really, 

but figuratively and mystically by faith. But they are in error. 

For the meaning of S. Augustine is, In the Eucharist we do not eat 

the Flesh of Christ by visibly cutting and masticating it, as 

the Capharnaites supposed, but under a sacrament, i.e., sacra-

mentally and invisibly, lying hid under the species of bread 

and wine. For if understood otherwise, S. Augustine would 

conflict with himself (Serm. 1. in Ps. xxxiii. and Lib. 22, Civit. c. 8, 

and elsewhere), where he manifestly upholds the truth of Christ's 

Body in the Eucharist. 

Wherefore Christ subjoins, the words which I speak, &c. : Spirit, 

i.e., are spiritual, and must be understood spiritually, i.e., Sacra-

mentally, in the manner in which I have now explained, and not 

carnally, as ye Capharnaites, like butchers, understand them. So 

they are life, i.e., vital, and bestow life on him who heareth and eateth 

Me. There is a hebraism, by which the abstract is put for the 

concrete, Thus frequently elsewhere the flesh and spirit are put 

for the carnal and spiritual understanding and sense. Thus 2 Cor. 

iii. 6, " The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." Matt. xvi. 17, 

"Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee." Moreover it 

is common in Scripture to play upon the meanings of words. 

Wherefore it is not surprising that flesh is to be understood 

differently from what it is in verse 56, &c. My Flesh is truly Food. 

For there real, but here figurative flesh is meant. So Christ plays 

upon the meaning of water (c. iv.), rising from the corporeal to the 

spiritual sense. So the Apostle plays upon the word sin (2. Cor. 

v. 21), " He who knew no sin, was made sin," i.e., a Victim tor 

sin, " for us." 

Thirdly, the fullest sense will be if we join both meanings 

previously given, and with Bede unite them into one, thus—The 

virtue of giving life which My Flesh eaten in the Eucharist pos-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwQx9TRxAFefFfnxHIcGwbV1-wiwjvT76EV95Suh2zq9to9DuRMjC3HQIdW4lZgboyEMosd-wf8uFCGYGUoZGiZnNPwlapmWCS-1cW5mkOsv6Kn-EuRTUtXz11Eauqd1r5VULeK1Q=w615-h900-v0

ea9c6408-d6aa-42f7-bbc6-3b90caa4d35d

256 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

sesses, is not derived so much from the flesh as from the Spirit of 

the Word which is living and life-giving. And consequently this 

eating of My Flesh is not to be taken in the carnal manner of 

butchers, but in a spiritual manner, and accommodated to the 

spirit, that is to say in a hidden and sacramental manner. For 

from the words of Christ ignorantly understood the Capharnaites 

alleged the contrary of both, and turned away, as is plain from the 

words. And so this spiritual, i.e., sacramental, manner of eating the 

Flesh of Christ by taking the species of bread and wine, under 

which in reality lie hid the Body and Blood of Christ and His 

Divinity Itself, occasions no horror to the eater, and causes no 

wounding or harm to the Flesh of Christ which is eaten. For 

here Christ lies hid, and is invisible and indivisible like an angel. 

So Euthymius says, " They are things spiritual and life-giving. 

For we ought not simply to look at them (for that is carnally to 

understand them), but we ought to suppose something else, and to 

look upon them as mysteries with our inward eyes." 

Ver. 65. 

 

But there are some, &c. The reason why some of you 

do not receive, but oppose, My words concerning the Eucharist, is 

not because My saying is hard, as ye say, but because ye are faith-

less, and will not believe My many miracles and signs. For here 

there is need of humble faith, which ought by lowly prayer to be 

asked and waited for from God the Father. But ye lack humility 

both of prayer and faith, and therefore ye neither pray to God, nor 

believe in Me. So S. Augustine, Bede and Rupert. 

For Jesus knew, &c. It means that Christ as God knew from 

eternity what would happen, and this foreknowledge He communi-

cated to His Humanity from the beginning of His conception. And 

who should betray Him. By this John intimates that Judas the 

traitor was one of those who did not believe ; indeed, that he was 

offended at Christ's sayings concerning the eating His flesh : that 

he conceived and cherished a dislike to Christ, which at last broke 

out into treachery against Him. The connection makes this con-

clusion necessary. Otherwise this mention of the traitor would be 

inopportune, unless from this discourse of Christ Judas had taken

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyb1vmRQEKIKG7TzhqdOHxHj9l3o_28y5hMeQM3eegT0oXz6gbUrl5UUq4DTZY2X-shFvR4cn3kmZ-yHyGfFu5BSGGFD2IUTPtvvu2CKJCCKmWnxzLZtydDgp0-ZqJg2uLgIJzDKQ=w615-h900-v0

946cb9d1-cf8d-4790-bad3-d69055b01406

SUFFICIENT GRACE. 257 

the first initiative of his unbelief and subsequent treachery. So S. 

Augustine, Bede, &c. 

Christ added this that the Jews might not think that He had, 

unaware of his future treachery, admitted Judas to the Apostolate. 

He had done it consciously and advisedly, that so His Passion and 

man's redemption might be fulfilled as God had decreed. 

Ver. 66. 

 

And said, &c, except it be given him, &&, i.e., except My Father draw him, as He said in verse 44. Graciously does Christ 

not attribute the unbelief of the Jews to their fault, but excuses 

them on the ground that it was not given them of the Father : at the 

same time He consoles Himself, as it were, thus—" I do not dis-

tress Myself because many do not believe in Me, but I console 

Myself because the Father will cause to believe in Me those whom 

He hath chosen, and will cause them to come to Me. With these 

I am content. I am not ambitious of others. For whom the 

Father willeth (to come), those I also will ; and those whom He 

willeth not (to come), those likewise I do not will." Yet those who 

would not come, i.e., would not believe in Christ, sinned, both 

because they had sufficient grace, by which they might have be-

lieved if they had wished (although they had not efficacious grace, 

by which they would really and actually believe), as also because 

they did not humbly ask of God efficacious grace, also because by 

their pride, and other sins, they had rendered themselves unworthy 

of that grace. Yea, by their obstinacy they repelled the grace and 

faith of God, as S. Cyprian learnedly explains (lib. 1, epist. 3, ad. 

Cornel.) 

Ver. 67. From this time, say Euthymius and others : otherwise the 

Syriac, on account of this discourse : Arabic, because of this, leftJesus, 

&c. These disciples were not the Apostles, for Christ excepts them 

in the following verse. Neither were they the seventy-two disciples. 

For those had not yet been designated and chosen by Christ. 

But they were His more constant hearers and followers, "who," 

as Theophylact says, "followed Him in the rank of His disciples, 

and remained with Him longer than the multitudes, and so, com-

pared with the rest of the crowd, were called His disciples. These 

vol. v, R

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxHhtqx5DAkmBZ3f9IJnt-504Ca6uylqj1fIXm74A3flqR28wjhY7V3Px05DFGmsio5qDoqsfzmHjSaUVq6xNoQr6w0zWwA_GZkkYpw7qJaNaKzXIdYE08m1B6xSe5F5KSyk0pvzw=w615-h900-v0

e77d2db0-db5a-47e6-b355-cabf35542c0a

258 S. JOHN, c. VI. 

persons therefore up to this time being allured by the sweet doctrine 

of Christ, fed by the loaves miraculously multiplied, and hoping to 

be fed in future by similar food, when they heard Christ substituting 

His own Flesh in the place of bread, and willing that they should 

eat It, thought either that He was mad, or else was contriving some 

horrible and savage scheme, or perchance a conspiracy against the 

Romans, and would inaugurate it by their tasting His flesh and 

blood, as Cataline had done before at Rome. Thus, to provide for 

their own safety, they fell away from Christ. 

S. Epiphanius declares expressly that one of these was S. Mark, 

who was afterwards brought back by S. Peter, and became an 

Evangelist {Hares. 51): but others deny this, and assert that 

S. Mark neither saw nor heard Christ (in the flesh), but was con-

verted by S. Peter after His death. So S. Jerome on Ecclesiastical 

Writers, and others. 

Ver. 68.—Jesus said therefore, &c. For when the others were scan-

dalized and went away from Christ "the Twelve remained," says 

S. Augustine, " for not even did Judas go away :" partly for shame's 

sake, not to be the only Apostle to go away, and be called an 

apostate 

; 

partly that he might be fed by Christ without labour on 

his part, as he had been hitherto ; and that as he bore the bag and 

was a sort of purveyor for Christ's family, he might steal and 

enrich himself. For he was a thief. 

Christ asks the question of the Apostles for five reasons. The 

first was that He might leave them their liberty. As though He 

said, " I give you your choice : if ye wish to go away, depart : if 

ye wish to remain with Me, remain. I will not retain you either 

by force, or shame." Listen to S. Chrysostom. " Jesus neither 

flattered, nor drove away : but He asked the question, not because 

He despised them, but that they might not seem to be retained 

by compulsion." For if they had remained unwillingly, He 

would have been in exactly the same condition as if they had 

gone away. 

(2.) To show His greatness of soul; and that He did not need 

the work of Apostles, forasmuch as He by Himself could do all

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzBGJBmdAV9Myah7-k6OYxXW2e-uZjMHxbqYpTdRu89ab2-gWb1T--aGA_NykgEblLlkN8F4_ldJz0HXxR7FpE8EXI2zSR6VUJDx-uoSPswYz5bT-U3RbFhp6BiI4m9-xLn7XCp=w615-h900-v0

9f94c1a4-f9e2-4820-90af-7dd27d1c1f34

peter's answer. 259 

things : and when they were sent away, He could substitute others 

who were better in their place. 

(3.) That the Apostles might understand that by remaining, they 

did not commend, or show favour to Jesus, but to themselves. 

"That they received rather than conferred a benefit," says Theo-

phylact. 

(4.) That by this freedom of choice He might the more bind 

them to Himself, and invite them to remain. For it often occurs, 

as a natural consequence, that when we are asked, we decline 

; 

when we are not asked, we desire ; when we are invited, we flee 

 

when we are not invited, we draw near. 

(5.) That by this interrogation He might prove their affection, 

and try their constancy, and draw a confession of their true faith 

concerning Himself. So S. Cyril. And that such a confession 

was drawn forth is plain from the next verse. 

Ver. 69. 

 

Simon Peter therefore answered, &c. Peter, as greater 

in rank (prdine major), says S. Cyril, firmer in faith, more loving 

to Jesus, more fervent in spirit, answered in the name of the rest 

of the Apostles, thinking that this was the mind and feeling of all. 

For that which he himself thought of Jesus he believed his col-

leagues thought likewise. 

To whom shall we go 1 Meaning, says S. Augustine, " Do you 

send us from Thee ? Give us another such as Thou art. To whom 

shall we go, if we leave Thee ? " Wherefore S. Chrysostom says, 

" This is an answer of great affection. For Christ was preferable 

to both father and mother." 

Thou hast the words of eternal life. First, as it were said, " Thy 

words, O Jesus, are sweet and life-giving, because they promise the 

very eternal life. Who therefore, save a fool, would leave them, 

and go elsewhere ? " S. Cyril saith, " Not hard are the words, as 

those Capharnaites say, but Thou hast the words of eternal life, 

which are able to lead those who believe to the incorruptible life." 

Wherefore what Thou hast said concerning Thy flesh to be eaten, 

that by It we may obtain eternal life, although I do not as yet 

well understand it, yet am I not scandalized, nor offended by Thy

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyyINGSsgGBoSaX8PiM_Oc54gqQ-WutztCcOq3jycMT5xXD8KJHM9DDLlrBP3c07qkzpXQxl7qO4PPp5kytoPO1iG3VjN3KxwCBJa55qjY1vax2D3IZvbPGgI8XLZgDxrm7e6P1=w615-h900-v0

9ff69f92-b21c-4faa-9c23-6d4020796bb6

260 S. JOHN, C. VI. 

words, but I firmly believe them to be true, not doubting that in 

due time I shall understand them better, and silently asking and 

beseeching Thee to cause me to do this. 

(2.) By Thy words, O Jesus, Thou dost promise us eternal life, if 

we eat Thy Flesh. These words draw us and unite us to Thee, 

rather than drive us away. For who would not wish for eternal life, 

and such a means of obtaining it ? Wherefore the Arabic renders, 

To whom shall we go, since the words of eternal life are with Thee f 

" Hence we learn," says Cyril, " that one only Christ who is able 

to bring us to everlasting life, must be followed as our Master." 

(3.) Thou hast the words, &c. Because Thou art Life eternal. 

Therefore in Thy Flesh and Blood Thou only givest what Thou 

art, says S. Augustine. Thou art the Word of the Father: and 

therefore Thou hast in Thee eternal life, because Thou art Life 

eternal Itself. What wonder then if Thou bestowest on those who 

eat Thee, life eternal ? For Thou dost bestow that very self-same 

thing which Thou art. 

Ver. 70. 

 

Afid we believe, &c. The Greek has the article to both 

Christ and Son ; Xgiarb;, the Christ promised by God, and expected 

for so many ages : u'tbg, i.e., the Son of God by nature and sub-

stance, not adopted by grace. " Diligently consider this," says 

Cyril, "that everywhere, especially with the prefix of the article, 

they say, Thou art the very Christ, the very Son of the Living God, 

truly and naturally separating (this) Son from other sons of God, 

who being called, are adopted by grace. And we being conjoined 

by likeness to Him, are called sons." 

We know, from the testimony of John the Baptist, our prophet 

and master, from the many and great miracles which Thou hast 

wrought, from Thy heavenly doctrine, and the holiness of Thy life, 

which we who are in constant intercourse with Thee, know to be 

heavenly and Divine. 

Son of God: the Greek adds rou ^uvro;, the living, so also the 

Syriac and Arabic read. The meaning is, We believe that Thou 

art the Son of God. Wherefore, we also believe that all Thy sayings 

are Divine and most true, even when we do not understand them,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz8PNrFDu2So3XMxshB065H-UoyFkeBWABod9YFQfhBxRqZiLh0_xBW3g76kioqbjnI_sZcSF5V5JiqTcTSFDrwyWimpjnKqgtFfusRoqgUtsBYk57meSVk5J1Znh6snH2bPbea2Q=w615-h900-v0

9871e0b9-99cf-49ff-85b9-4b1729308fcb

JUDAS USED FOR GOOD. 26 

 

and therefore that they are life-giving, and confer salvation and 

eternal life. For Thou art the Son of the Living God, who in 

His Essence is Life, which He communicates to Thee : therefore 

nothing can proceed from Thee but what is vital and life-giving 

 

neither do we expect anything else from Thee. 

Ver. 71.—Jesus answered, Thou, O Peter, answerest in the name 

of all the Apostles, as if all believed in Me, and were My faithful 

friends. But know that thou art deceived, for one of them is a devil, 

unbelieving, and faithless to Me, who also will betray Me. 

Have chosen Twelve, as to the Apostleship according to their 

present state apt and meet. Whence it seems that Judas the traitor, 

even when he was first chosen by Christ, was good and honest. 

For prudence and charity forbid the choice of one who is dishonest. 

So S. Cyril, Maldonatus and others. Also S. Jerome {lib. 3, cont. 

Pelag.), Tertullian (lib. de prcescrip. hceret. c. 3). Some, however, 

think that Judas, when he was bad, as Christ knew, was yet chosen 

by Him to be an Apostle, with this object, that it might be one of 

His own who should betray Him, and so afford the occasion and the 

way for His passion and death, and from them the redemption of 

men. This opinion is attributed to SS. Bede and Augustine, yet 

neither says so expressly. Indeed, both rather intimate that Judas 

was chosen by Christ when he was good, even though he was known 

to be about to become bad by his own fault. Hear S. Augustine : 

"Their number of Twelve was consecrated, who through the four 

quarters of the world were to proclaim the Trinity. And because 

one of them perished, not on that account was the honour of that 

number taken away from them. For in the room of him who 

perished another was chosen." And after a while he says, " He was 

chosen, from whom, albeit unwilling, and knowing it not, a great 

good was to proceed. For as wicked men wickedly use the good 

works of God, so, on the contrary, God for good uses the wicked 

works of men. The Lord used for good the wicked Judas, and 

delivered Himself to be betrayed that He might redeem us." Hear 

also Bede: "To one end He chose eleven, to another end one. 

These He chose that they should persevere in the dignity of the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy2K2vgzozjQhJMcuvCZQNp5Mk8OwoA557fYx4Ws8_32JwoLw3xC8_J_6GTuneJNKQKeY5riPhhNNnXy34vLGQsmHvyWe3yrLYGqe8zqUrIgEStqO8UvXTftKyQYWAqXZ4Ygosvyw=w615-h900-v0

703df921-3ba4-4615-989a-ddf1fd21df69

262 s. joMn, c vi. 

apostolats, him, that by the office of his treachery He might work 

out the salvation of the human race." 

A devil ; Syriac, Satan Nonnus, he who is called by posterity 

another new devil. Christ would not name Judas that He might 

spare his reputation. " He neither openly pointed him out," says 

S. Chrysostom, " nor wished him to lie concealed. The former was 

that he might not contend too impudently ; the latter, lest supposing 

he was concealed, he should act too unguardedly." He did it also 

that he might impress the Apostles with fear, that they like Judas 

might not apostatize, nor presume proudly upon their own con-

stancy. Listen to Cyril : " He confirms them by sharper words, 

and makes them diligent by the peril before their eyes. For it is 

thus He seems to speak, Ye have need, O ye disciples, of great 

watchfulness, and great care for your safety : for the way of perdition 

is very slippery." After a while, " He makes all more watchful, 

because He does not say openly who would betray Him, but affirm-

ing that the charge of such heinous impiety hung over one, He 

makes them all anxious, and by the dread of such a thing He 

arouses them to greater vigilance." 

You will ask why Judas is called a devil. I answer (i.) because 

he was diufioXog (diabolus), i.e., a false accuser. For he spoke evil 

of the works and miracles of Christ to the Scribes and chief priests. 

(2.) He was a diabolus, Hebrew and Syriac, a Satan, i.e., an 

adversary, because he opposed himself to Christ. 

(3.) He was a diabolus because he did not believe in Christ, 

because he was a thief and a liar. For the devil is " a liar and the 

father of a lie " (cap. viii.) Wherefore Christ saith, he is a devil, in 

the present tense, not will be in the future. 

(4.) He was a devil, that is a minister of the devil, an instrument and 

organ of the devil. For at the instigation of the devil he betrayed 

Christ his Lord and his God, as though he had been possessed of a 

devil. Whence John says (xiii. 2), that " Satan entered into him." 

So S. Chrysostom and others. So in common speech a very wicked 

man is called a devil. 

(5.) He was a diabolus, i.e., betrayer of Christ. For in this sense

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxrsuinBmJO_NHrN6k_gsoAT4pb4ZJEXRsxCwi1pA6ADOA_PkJyh4xnvfdPNm637c3WkVmYrA_tU9zWVzhwzAiV2Iv3hl7fvYa7Xei5gITZb1oT1LpEjcJWeCjpuQWQILPrAx09=w615-h900-v0

6b944d5d-f40a-4a3c-9787-66e18c6e9208

WHY JUDAS CALLED A DEVIL. 263 

diabolus is used for a traitor in Ecclus. xxvi. 6, in the Greek, though 

the Vulgate has betrayal. So the devil is the traitor angel, because 

by his malice he betrayed and ruined the angelic state. For from the 

angelic choirs and from heaven Lucifer, the traitor, by his perfidy 

dragged down with himself to hell the third part of the stars (Apoc. 

xii. 4). He betrayed therefore heaven and its inhabitants to hell 

and destruction. 

Christ is alluding to the fall of Lucifer, who being chosen by God 

prince of the angels, by his pride made himself a devil and the prince 

of the demons. In like manner Judas chosen by Christ to the angelic 

office of the Apostolate, by his own fault fell from it, and made him-

self a companion of the devil, and a diabolus, that we may learn to 

work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and to fear a fall, 

although we stand in the most holy places. For the higher the place 

the greater is the fall, and the ruin the more profound. 

Ver. "j2.—But he spake, &c. Christ forewarns the Apostles, so 

that when they should afterwards behold the treachery of Judas, 

they might know that He had foreseen and foretold it, and therefore 

that it was not against His will, but by the permission of His certain 

counsel that this was done to bring about His death, by which He 

might redeem the human race. 

Here John finishes the acts of the second year of Christ's preaching, 

up to the third year, or from the second Passover to the third. He proceeds with the acts of the third year in the following chapter. 

He passes over therefore many acts of Christ's second year, because 

they had been given at length by the other three Evangelists. He concludes Christ's second year with the multiplication of the loaves, 

which He wrought about the time of the Passover, and which 

furnished the occasion of Christ's long argument with the Jews 

concerning the spiritual bread and His Flesh to be partaken in the 

Eucharist.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyh2ejJONlu94ShhgXPti0Zl1iAt-fbUOohgo_gHxXMQwJBLkbbQAusZgmRH4F8-X5b0CNxWqAQnj0x8CDaLHhETDk3M7cZMqEvJXY2zA6feD1nqP3Mf1UnWULKc91qIs3PI3q7lA=w615-h900-v0

c1400ef8-9e3c-45e0-a455-d3379a6396ee

264 ) 

CHAPTER VII. 

I Christ goes up to "Jerusalem from Galilee. 12 Answered the Jews by saying that 

He was taught and sent by the Father to heal the sick even on tht Sabbath. 

32 The soldiers who were sent by the Pharisees to seize Him, refused to act. 

50 Nicodemus reproved by the Phariseesfor taking His part. 

AFTER these things Jesus walked in Galilee : for he would not walk in Jewry, 

because the Jews sought to kill him. 

2 Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. 

3 His brethren therefore said, unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that 

thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. 

4 For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to 

be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world. 

5 For neither did his brethren believe in him. 

6 Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come : but your time is alway 

ready. 

7 The world cannot hate you ; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the 

works thereof are evil. 

8 Go ye up unto this feast : I go not up yet unto this feast : for my time is not 

yet full come. 

9 When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee. 

10 IT But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast 

not openly, but as it were in secret. 

11 Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he ? 

12 And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him : for 

some said, He is a good man : others said, Nay ; but he deceiveth the people. 

13 Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews. 

14 IT Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and 

taught. 

15 And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having 

never learned ? 

16 Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent 

me. 

17 If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of 

God, or whether I speak of myself. 

18 He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory : but he that seeketh his 

glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. 

19 Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? 

Why go ye about to kill me ?

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyrDe7AdR4XcGAVoPTNxWdCeqRZggEsF6dPpRgGa3CCw2Fu0E7Atr2XvvTQaEXvtNJNDz2gbq9y2rAwc3PQL_jnsBNc3TvV4Aa2kfLDK0Hd3Cnj4JyLAwc70lTavX-BTiLaUUWXnA=w615-h900-v0

bb52c321-2eff-4039-b1db-40ea4e3a76aa

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. 265 

20 The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil : who goeth about to kill 

thee? 

21 Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all 

marvel. 

22 Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision ; (not because it is of Moses, 

but of the fathers ;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man. 

23 If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses 

should not be broken ; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit 

whole on the sabbath day ? 

24 Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. 

25 Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to 

kill? 

26 But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers 

know indeed that this is the very Christ ? 

27 Howbeit we know this man whence he is : but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. 

28 Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and 

ye know whence I am : and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, 

whom ye know not. 

29 But I know him : for I am from him, and he hath sent me. 

30 Then they sought to take him : but no man laid hands on him, because his 

hour was not yet come. 

31 And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, 

will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done ? 

32 IT The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning 

him ; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him. 

33 Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go 

unto him that sent me. 

34 Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me : and where I am, thither ye cannot 

come. 

35 Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we shall not 

find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the 

Gentiles ? 

36 What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not 

find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come? 

37 In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If 

any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. 

38 He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall 

flow rivers of living water. 

39 (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should 

receive 

: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given ; because that Jesus was not yet 

glorified.) 

40 IT Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a 

truth this is the Prophet. 

41 Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of 

Galilee ? 

42 Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and 

out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was ?

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzADSUdLo76PxcHj1c00GB_wG_ASal7Kx2IOj_NQSMi5tc9RFk9eN3ymTRGQBoxXeWcHHiKmr-rgjFSgCWbL1jA5_5aW3GG1gQWYW8POk3zFr9W4p198MEqg8VZSo7OKyS6nNTI=w615-h900-v0

119e21e6-72d4-41c8-8e1d-587bf76e7655

266 S. JOHN, C VII. 

43 So there was a division among the people because of him. 

44 And some of them would have taken him ; but no man laid hands on him. 

45 IT Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees ; and they said 

unto them, Why have ye not brought him ? 

46 The officers answered, Never spake man like this man. 

47 Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived ? 

48 Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? 

49 But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed. 

50 Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of 

them,) 

51 Doth our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he doeth ? 

52 They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and 

look : for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. 

53 And every man went unto his own house. 

But after this Jesus walked in Galilee, &c. Not immediately, but 

about six months after. The incidents of the former chapter took 

place in March, the feast of tabernacles was in September. But 

Christ lived six months after this, to the following March. All which 

follows Christ said and did in the last months of His life. S. John 

then omits here the events of these six months, amongst which are 

the defence of the disciples for eating with unwashed hands ; the 

healing of the daughter of the Canaanitish woman ; St. Peter's 

testimony, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God, for 

which He was constituted the head of the Church ; the paying the 

tribute-money ; His reproof of the Apostles for disputing who was 

the greatest, &c. For all this which S. John omits had been 

recorded by the other Evangelists. 

Jesus walked in Galilee. He was already in Galilee, but it means 

He went to and fro in Galilee, preaching the kingdom of God. 

For He would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews (i.e., the 

chief of the Jews) sought to kill him, because He kept not the 

Sabbath, as the Jews did, but healed the sick on that day, and 

called God His father, and consequently asserted that He Himself 

was God (see chap. v. 18). It appears that Jesus did not go up 

to Jerusalem at either the Passover or Pentecost of this year. And 

this because He knew the death that was devised against Him, 

before His appointed time; not because He feared the Jews, or 

dreaded death, but to set us an example of flying from our persecutors,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyCJXoeQDnDkW6eSXM1cE6pdc09hYJ2kS0P62iff_MGWvZxSVePYHttuYxZmFVmRY5VDyIffDbMRTQLNvVg8qZ_tvbXqJ-o40K7M_l8fyyS65Rj5y9DhF6oB07bH9Ac6BuSJVgDSw=w615-h900-v0

6060c019-06b2-4d98-8e70-d1a0db6f4c32

FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 267 

till God otherwise reveals, and delivers us into their hands, as S. 

Athanasius did. (So say S. Augustine and others.) 

Ver. 2. 

 

But theJews'feast of tabernacles was at hand. They kept 

it for seven days, living in booths, hastily constructed of branches 

of trees, in memory of the forty years' wandering in the wilderness. 

The Syriac version for Scenopegia reads Conopea quite wrongly. For 

these were mosquito curtains, not booths. Abulensis (in Lev. xxiii. 

34) gives a most erroneous derivation of en^wiz-nym, and Plutarch 

from not knowing Hebrew was equally wrong in regarding this 

feast as merely a Bacchanalian orgy, mistaking also the meaning of 

Sabbath. 

Ver. 3. But His brethren said to Him. Not the sons of Joseph, 

as Leontius, Cyril, and Euthymius supposed, for both Joseph and 

Mary remained virgins; nor yetJames and John, as Chrysostom thinks, 

for they were Apostles already, but kinsmen of the Blessed Virgin, 

or even of Joseph (see S. Luke, chap. hi. ad fin.) Some, that is, of 

His kinsfolk, not all ; for some believed in Him, some not. 

Depart hence and go into Judea. From Galilee and the ignoble 

Capharnaum to the coming feast of tabernacles, to make Thyself 

known to them by Thy doctrine and miracles. They wish to draw 

Him away from Galilee, to be known and renowned at Jerusalem. 

That Thy disciples also may see the works that Thou doest. Thou, 

Jesus, our kinsman, art performing wondrous works in a corner 

of Galilee, before Thy few and poor disciples in Galilee, come with 

us to Jerusalem, and work similar works there ; that Thy disciples, 

whom Thou hast there obtained by Thy preaching, and wilt here-

after gain by Thy miracles, not from the people only, but also from 

the Priests, Scribes, and chiefs of the people, may be instructed or 

confirmed in Thy faith, and receive thee as a Prophet and the 

Messiah. For they wished that Christ should come especially to 

their notice, that the chief rulers should proclaim Jesus to be the 

Messiah, and propose Him as such for the reception of the people. 

For it was theirs to decide about the faith, the prophets, and the 

Messiah, and what they decided that the people followed and did. 

Ver. 4. For no man doeth anything in secret and he himselfseeketh

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAztiCZRbghbFTLkLMCYZnoMu_yYkEE-v6SIybbg4yKAKeUqc2e-NVkB_QRsPRh0iuJqn3QJyA3hIpxQmu5gNOnnPvlJy3qXIi7DU1xKfvZ3paFt3IyViyD8HWKn5kHujDfXYBGVXQ=w615-h900-v0

31dafae8-2c64-45b2-ac71-870ef2c20748

268 S. JOHN, C. Vil. 

to be known openly. Ev vagprieia, properly means to be at liberty ; but 

here, as opposed to " secretly," it means " openly " (see John v. 13 ; 

xvi. 25, 29 ; xviii. 20 ; and S. Mark viii. 32). So Maldonatus and 

others. 

If Thou doest this, manifest Thyself to the world. " If" does not 

imply doubt, but means assertion, and is the same as " since." 

Since Thou doest such great and wondrous works in Galilee, do 

the same in Jerusalem, that there all Israel, and from them the whole 

world, may know who Thou art, and what dignity, power, and virtue 

Thou hast received from the Father. For as Raphael saith, " It is 

good to keep close the secret of a king, but it is honourable to 

reveal and make known the works of God " (Tob. xii. 7). They make 

the praise of Christ and the glory of God a cloke for their own 

covetousness and ambition : for they wished that as Christ became 

renowned by the fame of His miracles, they as His kinsman might 

become renowned, and honoured by the people, and be loaded with 

gifts : and might, moreover, secure the favour of the rulers and 

priests, and then, as they hoped, rise to high offices in the state. 

Just as when one is made Pope, or Cardinal, or Bishop, his kinsfolk 

at once flock about him, to gain through him honours and wealth. 

For " all seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ." 

Ver. 5. 

 

For neither did His brethren believe in Him. They so 

freely and boldly urged Jesus to come with them to Jerusalem, 

because they did not fully believe that He was the Christ. For had 

they believed it, they would not have dared to speak to Him so 

freely. So says Euthymius. For though they saw Him work so 

many miracles, and did not doubt their truth, yet they doubt 

whether He were the Messiah and the Son of God. For though 

they wished it to be true, and partly believed it on account of His 

many miracles, yet on the other hand they doubted when they saw 

Him so poor and despised. To make certain they urge Christ to 

go with them to Jerusalem, where the Scribes and Priests could, on 

examination had, declare Him to be the Christ, and thus He, and 

they through Him, might gain honour and celebrity. 

Ver. 6.—Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come, butyour

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAymXUS9xjqtXJByQaiqafZCSP64tvTUtv-L3HprHMU_K6871fJ2mrgq_bGsJisdBa7Ui952YXbCErbPj-AAeE9wgi4_9SeZpZ9POD-PeBu9g8WGBIIAiuPVYNjMRvpBqrVs8XcLYg=w615-h900-v0

7d99e939-06fc-4014-b6ae-cae223ceb9a5

CHRIST'S TIME. 269 

time is always ready. My time is appointed of the Father, but it 

must be put off for a few days, through the hatred with which the 

Jews pursue me. For this reason I will go up in a few days, but 

with secrecy. But do ye go first, for any time is fitting and appro-

priate for you. I will follow you secretly. (See Jansenius, F. Lucas, 

and others.) 

On the other hand, S. Chrysostom and others (see Maldonatus) 

consider that the time spoken of is the time of His death, which had 

not yet come. The first meaning is the best. 

Ver. 7. 

 

The world cannot hate you, &c. You (my kinsmen) can go 

at any time to Jerusalem without risk, because ye do not oppose the 

Scribes, but rather favour, and pay them court. But I, if I go up 

openly with you, put Myself in manifest peril of My life. So S. 

Cyril, who also adds the reason, " For a mind given to pleasures, 

greatly resents being called away from them j " for the Scribes 

were unwilling to abandon their pleasures, their luxuries, their 

injustice, and therefore hated Christ, who wished to draw them away 

from them, as the wise man says (Wisdom ii. 12). 

Ver. 8. Go ye up unto thisfeast. For ye have no danger to fear 

(says Euthymius). 

But Igo not up yet to this feast. I am waiting for the anger of 

the Scribes to subside. For they are looking out for Me to kill Me 

at the beginning of the feast, but after three days I shall come up 

secretly and with less danger by myself. For it is clear from verse 

io that He came up a little while after. It is probable that Christ said, 

as the Vulgate reads, " I go not up," for had he said, " I go not up 

yet," his kinsmen would have proposed to wait for Him. But Christ's 

meaning was, I go not up yet, though He did not say so to His 

kinsmen, to relieve their vexation. Secondly, S. Augustine and Cyril 

explain " I go not up on this first day of the Feast, but afterwards 

on the fourth day." But the truer view is that He determined to go 

up on the first day (see on ver. 14). Maldonatus explains, " I go not 

up as ye wish and suppose, as a mere man to be honoured and 

followed by the people. But I shall soon go up thither as the 

Messiah and Son of God to teach them the way of salvation, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwh_M8frGRFwcllLtZywsamg9VxU9WBDiKhonj1MTuJAXPGRbqnE6vi1kJi553KQ4ZZnD764fPTWnvXMfdKrghC7arpa-nsQps6X6mQsRoIamrII3dUT3Aw6H8gyJEBnmnUXGL9=w615-h900-v0

43b3295e-0c11-4edf-8e3b-0057b48bd1d2

270 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

thus seek to extend His glory and not My own. But this seems 

somewhat forced. 

Ver. 9, 10.— When he had said these words, &c. Christ appears 

not to have taken the straight road through Samaria, but to have 

crossed the Jordan, and after dismissing the multitudes, to have gone 

up to Jerusalem, with a few of His favoured disciples, in secret 

(see Matt. xix. i, 2 ; Luke ix. 51, 53 ; Mark ix. 29, x. 1). 

Ver. n. 

 

The Jews therefore sought Him at the feast, and said, 

Where is He ? S. Chrysostom says that on a feast day they were 

always disposed to murder, and they endeavoured to catch Him on 

feast days. And Euthymius, " Admirable work for feast days, in 

making them occasions for murder ; and that on the very day they 

ought to have been searching for Christ in order to believe on Him 

they were aiming only at His death." And thus in our days many 

on the feast days on which they ought to be making their peace with 

God, only offend Him by their gross sins and blaspheming, making 

their feasts to the devil and not to God ; this is the fraud and sug-

gestion of the devil, who takes away the service due to God, and 

appropriates it to himself. 

Where is He, that impostor, and deceiver of the people ? In their 

extreme wrath, says S. Chrysostom, they could not bear to mention 

Him by name. 

Ver. 12. 

 

And there was much murmuring, &c. He would make 

Himself the founder of a new faction, and stir up sedition and 

rebellion. 

A good man, nay, a teacher and a prophet ; this was the opinion of 

those who had heard Him teaching, and seen His miracles in 

Galilee. The contrary was the opinion of the Scribes and Rulers, 

and the multitude who followed them. 

Ver. 13. Howbeit no man spake, &c., i.e., from fear of the Scribes, 

Pharisees, and Chief Priests. S. John speaks of them merely as 

Jews, so as not to derogate from the authority of the Scribes and 

Priests, and also, as Cyril says, he counted it wrong to term persons 

so estrayed from holiness, priests or elders. "No one," i.e., of 

those who said that Jesus was a good man, says Euthymius ; or as

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyEOJIxe--LFJ-gGOmb9GMz3_iYSU7U_L7zSI8OsaixwPZZcqnqTA8JS22g8BjdLNrP1qycXd6cqMVbzrD-d_BERhKYY8GAMyyuI9kk_Qm8jur0XO-WXL7BuqKgvLwQ7Y7Cfb6z_A=w615-h900-v0

abbec603-b182-48fe-984e-d0c4dd315d1b

CHRIST TEACHES PUBLICLY. 27 

 

S. Augustine says, "They loudly proclaimed, 'He seduces the 

people ; ' 

' He is a good man,' they spoke in suppressed whispers." 

But about the midst of thefeast, Jesus went up into the temple. On 

the fourth or fifth day, for it lasted for eight days. 

S. Augustine, Theophylact, and others think that Christ entered 

Jerusalem and the temple on the same day : for when He came to 

the city He used first of all to visit the temple, as an act of piety, 

and many Christians follow his example. On the other hand, 

Toletus, Maldonatus, and others think that He went up shortly after 

His kinsfolk, so as to be present at the beginning of the feast, but 

that He did not enter the temple till the fourth day. This the lan-

guage of S. John both here and in verse 10 seems to require. And 

besides Jesus, as a teacher and pattern of religion, wished for the 

edification of others to keep the whole of this festival. (See Lev. 

xxiii. 43.) Moreover, they were required to erect their booths on 

the first day of the feast, which Jesus probably did, unless you 

suppose that He was taken into the booth of a disciple or friend. 

Coming up secretly in this way on the first day of the feast He ran 

no risk, unless He entered the temple, which He did not do till 

the fourth day, remaining hid in a booth for the first three days. 

His first entry then was in secret, His second was public, the one 

to keep the feast in the booths outside, and then afterwards to teach 

in the temple. 

But why did He not at once enter the temple? First, as S. 

Augustine and others reply, in order that the anger of the Scribes 

and Chief Priests who lived in the temple might cool down. (2.) 

His remaining concealed was for example's sake and from His weak-

ness as man, as His coming forth afterwards was a proof of Divine 

power, says S. Augustine, and Bede after him. (3.) To create in 

His expectant hearers a greater desire of hearing Him after such 

delay. (4.) That they might be more free to hear Him, when unem-

ployed in the necessary arrangements for the feast. 

And taught, after His own manner, the things which concerned 

salvation, and led to the kingdom of heaven ; and publicly too 

before the Scribes and Rulers who hated Him. Behold here the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxb1PccQKezX7VWmz1H7qvUC7-weeNMxT0668wmeM-8XUPhViku4zOAUR_wqWfaXqf4eoOySdS_ct8wuelmmyOXI9FGBAaX_Ne3Dxp7Fq4x_0rxBRdo4BkGLs1q1o5auysDXr4w7w=w615-h900-v0

a76ff1c5-eb28-4b68-bcac-3f0bccd1a6ee

272 S. JOHN, C. VIT. 

nobleness of His mind in intrepidly discharging His office in the 

midst of danger. For although the anger of the Scribes had some-

what cooled down by the delay of three days, yet it could be easily 

rekindled by His teaching thus in public. But Jesus nobly despised 

it, both because He was ready to be killed by them, and also 

because He knew that God would thwart their designs against Him, 

because the appointed time of His death had not come. By His 

three days' concealment He teaches us prudence, and by His 

coming forth and preaching openly on the fourth day He gave us 

a pattern of boldness, to discharge resolutely the duty imposed on 

us by God, even at the peril of our life, in sure trust that He will 

either deliver us from danger or give us strength and fortitude to 

bear and overcome it. 

Ver. 15. 

 

And (heJews wondered, saying, &c. " They marvelled," 

says Cyril, " when they saw in Him such unheard-of wisdom and 

power of speech ; 

" for, as Theophylact says, " He spake wondrous 

words, restraining and changing their minds in a wondrous manner," 

so that their fury was changed into love and admiration of Christ. 

" For they heard Him," says S. Augustine, " disputing about the 

law, and adducing its testimony," and explaining it with such grace 

and manner as was not human but divine. For, as he adds, " Many 

knew where He was born, and how brought up, but had never seen 

Him learning anything." And hence the Scribes ought to have 

inferred that His great learning and wisdom had not been acquired 

by study, but infused by God. But blinded and stupefied by hatred 

they stand still in wonder, and proceed not to investigate the origin 

of that which surprises them. So S. Chrysostom. And for this 

very cause God willed that Jesus should leap up into the chair of 

learning, not from the schools, but from the carpenter's trade, to the 

end that all might acknowledge that His learning was not taught 

by man but inspired by God. 

Ver. 16. Jesus answered, &c. My doctrines are not My inven-

tions nor the result of My study. They did not primarily and origi-

nally proceed from Me, but from God the Father. He, as I am God, 

communicated to Me His own omniscience. But, as I am man,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAycSFTfkiD4z95Ced60Jp9EfYMPd79ZBoUdjX2l_ag7l8azuMWCApsDMCqLZTgpnc2dLthpyw_Pb59FpoPH2sQcAE1Lc5mnKedij83s4gVsl8F0memT87WL0lvBQQ5VNC6uqNMipQ=w615-h900-v0

585ba50b-f5bd-44aa-b0b8-458bee952cd4

CHRIST SEEKS GOD*S GLORY. 2?3 

He cave and infused into Me His own Blessed knowledge of all 

things, according to that of Isaiah xi. 2. "The Spirit of the Lord 

shall rest upon Him," &c. So S. Chrysostom and others, who observe 

that in this very way Christ implies that He is God : as if He said, 

" 

I together with the Divine Essence have derived all My omnisci-

ence and doctrine from the Father." As S. Augustine says {Tract 

29), "What is the doctrine of the Father, but the Word of the 

Father? Christ Himself, therefore, is the doctrine of the Father, if 

He is the Word of the Father. But because a Word cannot be of 

no one, but of some one, He called Himself His own doctrine, and 

yet not His own, because He is the Word of the Father. For 

what is so much thine as thyself? and what is so little thine as 

thyself if thou art from some one else?" 

Ver 17. 

 

If any one is willing, &c. That is, something invented 

by Me, and therefore disagreeing, or contrary to the will of God. 

As S. Chrysostom says, " If anybody has love of virtue, he will 

understand the force of My words that they come from God. For 

of Him cometh every virtue, of which I am the earnest teacher. 

For be who loves to observe the commands of God in this matter, 

will love and observe My Word, because I do not say or do any-

thing contrary to what is pleasing and commanded by God ; 

 

tacitly hinting that they loved vice, and therefore were opposed to 

the teaching both of God and Himself. " Put away," says Chry-

sostom, " this doubt, your anger and malice and intense hatred of Me, 

and nothing will then keep you from acknowledging that My words 

are those of God. But now these tempers obscure your judgment, 

and if you put them aside you would think otherwise." 

Ver. iZ.—He that speaketh of Himself, &c. But on the other 

hand Cyril concludes with, " He who seeks not God's glory but 

his own, is a liar, and full of deceit"—a liar, because under pretence 

of observing the law he puts forth his own will ; and full of deceit, 

because he dares to prefer his own commands to those of God. 

This then is the second proof that Christ gives, that He speaks not 

of Himself. Put logicially it is thus, He that speaks for Himself 

seeks his own glory. But I seek not my own glory ; therefore I 

 s

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwLw44gtjxKuAy4FUPXe0125fj2WDf05akjUblj2FZzel_qucdqcOh8DcPDVeLJSFGUFVMNxdD_mifxWKNJmuVQQ98ZcK9dj0y6OjLtojAhTL4vF_r2QTFrYBxa4R8dB21YVOaj=w615-h900-v0

600a31ce-eb41-4c94-950b-125b9dc46c95

274 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

speak hot of Myself. Heretics and philosophers teach their own 

opinions, and call their followers after their own names. For in 

either case, it is desire for fame which causes heresies and sects. 

Unrighteousness, that is fraud, craft, deception, for Christ teaches 

sincerely and truly what he believes will please God and promote 

His glory, while others seek their own glory, and use flattery and 

other arts to extort it from men for themselves. 

Ver. 19-20. 

 

Did not Moses give you the law? And yet, Sac. The 

primary sense is, no wonder ye do not accept Mine and My Father's 

law, since ye keep not the law of Moses, which ye value so much 

and urge against Me. For it strictly forbids murder (Ex. xxiii. 7). 

So S. Augustine and others. But secondly, F. Lucas thus explains 

it more profoundly and more closely to the context : " Ye accuse 

Me of disregarding the law, and breaking the Sabbath by healing 

the paralytic. But ye equally break it by circumcising a man, which 

is a longer and more cruel act than healing with a word. Ye are 

therefore more deserving of death than I am." 

Ver. 20. 

 

The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil, who 

seeketh to kill Thee ? That is, Thou art mad as Saul was when pos-

sessed with a devil. Or more strictly, it is the devil who instigates 

Thee to make this false charge of murder against us. We never 

thought of it. These are the words of the people, some of whom 

thought well, and others ill of Christ, but yet did not wish to kill 

Him. But that was the wish of the Scribes and rulers, who 

mingled with the crowd. Christ therefore glances at them, and 

openly proclaims their secret plans for killing Him, which were 

fully known to Him, thus shewing Him to be God. 

Ver. 21. -Jesus answered and said unto them, Ihave done one work, 

and ye all marvel. The work of healing the paralytic. Jesus did not 

return taunt for taunt, but forbearingly suppressed his feelings, and 

with gentleness and prudence pulled up their charge by the roots. 

"He was not troubled, but calm in the possession of His truth ; He 

returned not evil for evil, or railing for railing, though, if He had 

said to them, Ye have a devil, He would certainly have spoken 

truth ; for they would never have said such things to Him who is

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwCDLz4dTc5Fy1jrd4yU1SELZlZRm-GSTCHLtWAVp8CWJDH9J8bHb-5BKT9_YB-03QT8JHKFpu5F0Yq5hauDgWShJNkF2uQz7l_k3DMLQkyOHyWKFzRMuyXAi6c-p6-GrZQ8xNAaA=w615-h900-v0

7ab30634-d3e5-4213-9e93-9c65b70e91c3

CIRCUMCISION UF THE FATHERS. 275 

Truth itself, if the false teaching of the devil had not ensnared 

them. 

Ye wonder, and are indignant, as though I had done contrary 

to the law. " Ye are disturbed and agitated," says S. Chrysostom. 

"Ye condemn Me," says Cyril. "Ye seek to kill Me," Euthymius. 

The order of events is inverted. For astonishment caused indigna-

tion, indignation disturbance, disturbance the contriving His death. 

Ver. 22. 

 

For this cause Moses, &c. (1.) Some, as Theophylact and 

Maldonatus, connect this with the preceding verse, " Ye all marvel 

at this My healing on the Sabbath." (2.) Euthymius and Jansen 

explain thus, "To keep you from wondering, just consider what 

I am going to say about circumcision." 

(3.) S. Cyril, Toletus and F. Lucas explain it thus : " Though 

Moses gave you circumcision, it was because he wished studiously 

to observe the tradition of the fathers, and yet on the Sabbath day, 

which Moses also authorised, ye circumcise a man. (4.) It is on 

account of the surprise you feel that I add an argument from the 

rite of circumcision, which ye perform by Moses' own order on the 

Sabbath. 

Not because it is of Moses, but 0/ the fathers. The patriarch 

Abraham, and not Moses, instituted circumcision. And he adds 

this to teach them not to rely to such an extent on the law of Moses 

alone, respecting the Sabbath, or to neglect the laws of those who 

preceded him. But on the other hand, if those earlier laws are at 

variance with the law of Moses, the elder laws should prevail and 

the law of Moses give way to them. And, thus, the law of circum-

cision given to Abraham cancelled the law of the Sabbath given to 

Moses, that if a child were born on the Sabbath, he was obliged 

to be circumcised precisely on the eighth day, and that his circum-

cision could not possibly be deferred to the day following. If then 

the law of Moses was obliged to give way to the law of Abraham, 

much more should it give way to the Law of Christ and God, which 

orders us to do good, if we can, to the sore afflicted, even on the 

Sabbath, more especially if we do so quickly, and in a word, as 

Christ did.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzFkXP9jCIHBvDC_gjNeUrkdCUTKuZWhCefYFDkdDaMeGzMmxZzt25EL0ri-UQA9lfFR3RmWSVNgatfTfi7b-uq1UcuXtsZH8cwhzVbpelwjOt2E7EegQpTswvwCiABYUajS-Bm=w615-h900-v0

66d60f2f-b6c6-4f4b-b74f-45c0743f1f3e

276 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

And ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man. And, i.e., there-

fore, because the law of circumcision was anterior, and given to 

Abraham by God, it overrules the Sabbath, which was instituted 

afterwards by Moses at the command of God. And therefore, if 

the eighth day from the child's birth is the Sabbath, ye circumcise 

him with great preparation and trouble, that the law of God given 

to Abraham may be kept. 

Ver. 23. 

 

If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, &c. 

If circumcision, which in its own nature is a servile, troublesome, 

and tedious work, as well as one causing pain, is not only lawful, but 

even commanded to be done on the Sabbath ; why am not I equally 

allowed to heal on the Sabbath a man who has been paralysed for 

so many years, and with a word to restore him to health, and that 

too to the alone praise and glory of God ? For the law of piety and 

kindness is a law of nature, to which every law, human and divine, 

such as that of the Sabbath, should give way. Observe here, "the 

whole man." For as Euthymius remarks, since his whole body was 

shattered by palsy, He rendered it entirely whole. Christ appositely 

compares the healing to circumcision, because as a superfluous part 

of the body is cut off by the one, so the palsy, which was attacking 

his whole body, was cut off by the other. But circumcision took 

place with pain and wounds, the healing by Christ with pleasure 

and complete health, for He healed the whole man, that is, body 

and soul together. Christ appears to have cut off from the soul of 

this sick man his vices and sins, and to have justified and sanctified 

him, as well as others who were healed by Him, just as circumcision 

by circumcising the flesh circumcised the soul also ; cut away from it 

original sin, and clothed it with the grace and righteousness of God. 

Ver. 24. -Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous 

judgment. He charges the Jews with acceptance of persons, in 

acquitting Moses, or rather themselves, in a like matter, but accus-

ing and condemning Jesus. Ye accuse Me as a Sabbath-breaker 

only for healing a sick man by my divine power, whereas ye think 

it lawful by the law of Moses to circumcise and wound a child, to 

heal his wound by applying plasters, and to staunch the blood, which

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhMwfmYMma1wCPzRCf0QKlKHla2GqyFiuTd13pVwXwFv_f_2BXBBkH1UFcK0uGaqFf1cRqDiz-jxUBbGYCwISfQbEEM4szsbbzZ2fWQGLSRxj5PV1ml51HMXa-Z_Rf2BycPMAqFQ=w615-h900-v0

cc728e03-32b4-4043-9b46-4a9d23743e5a

UNFAIRNESS OF THE JEWS. 2f? 

is much more tedious, painful and horrible. And this is because 

ye judge not acccording to the truth of things, but according to the 

dignity of the persons. For Me ye contemn as vile, poor and hated 

 

but ye set up yourselves with Moses as the chiefs and teachers of 

the people. For were ye to judge according to our doings, ye 

ought to acquit Me as well as Moses and yourselves ; or if ye con-

demn Me, ye should condemn both Moses and yourselves. For I 

healed the man on the Sabbath, but ye with Moses on the very 

same day first wound and afterwards heal the child. And my 

object was even more holy, because I did it only for the glory of 

God, to show that I was the Messiah. So say S. Augustine, S. 

Chrysostom, and others. Many think that Christ here put Him-

self above Moses. But it would be more fitly said that Christ here 

compared Himself with the Jews, who, according to the law of 

Moses, circumcised on the Sabbath. But Moses never expressly 

commanded this. It was merely inferred from his words. 

Ver. 25.— Therefore said sot?ie of them ofJerusalem. Those, that 

is, that were convinced by Christ's argument. Many of the people 

at Jerusalem had a leaning towards Him, but could not openly 

show it for fear of the rulers. 

Is not this He whom they seek to kill? They knew, says S. 

Augustine, how savagely He was sought for. The others then said 

falsely and craftily, " Who seeketh to kill Thee ? " 

Ver. it.—And lo He speaketh openly, and they say nothing against 

Him. What means this great silence? says Nonnus. Do the rulers 

know indeed that this is the very Christ7 They know it, or easily 

could have known it, but they, blinded by their pride and hatred, 

persecuted Him to the death; but they were restrained by His divine power from laying hands on Him. 

Ver. 27.—But we know this man, &c. We know that His parents are Joseph and Mary, and they themselves confessed elsewhere in 

general that they knew He was to be born in Bethlehem of the seed of David. But these were the words of the ignorant people, who thought that Christ would suddenly appear to the world from unknown ancestors, that He would remain hid -in Bethlehem for a

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwWB1I0Gx4ds-WkTOv2OAZ1s2wN28_2gZXZscq2vnmIquLT9uqhLZ216d3f47Fin3pqZ4XU_8pzgrSa1i4r3CTmklfnfabv3DLB6jHGgBhQmST1iv7XkS3NBbQ16jqGOtOba1Gn1w=w615-h900-v0

2b440126-fb77-477f-87d4-69be272af063

278 S. JOHN, C. VIT. 

long time, or else be carried away to a distance, be there brought up 

to man's estate, and then appear unexpectedly in Judea. Other 

strange myths were invented concerning Him, derived mainly from 

wrong interpretations of Is. liii. 8, Heb. vii. 3, Micah v. 2, and 

Ps. cix. 3 [see Vulg.), "Before the morning star I begat Thee from 

the womb : 

" all which passages should be understood of His divine 

and not of His human nature. But the Jews considered Him a 

mere man, and thought that He had been begotten from eternity 

in Bethlehem. On which account Christ teaches them that they 

knew His human, but not His divine origin. So Toletus and 

others. 

Ver. 28. 

 

Jesus therefore cried in the temple, &c. I grant what you 

say, that ye know My ancestry and My parents ; though ye are much 

mistaken. Ye do not know them ; for the Jews knew not the God-

head of Christ, regarding Him only as the son of Joseph. But S. 

Chrysostom and Maldonatus explain thus : " Ye know Me, i.e., ye 

ought, and are able to know that I am the Messiah. For I have 

proved this from prophecy, and confirmed it by miracles." 

He cried, as showing that He knew their secret murmurings. And 

the things which they spake secretly (says S. Chrysostom), He openly 

proclaimed, and confounded them. In order also by His loud speak-

ing to gain attention and add weight to His preaching. 

/ am tiot co?ne of Myself, but sent of the Father. But He is true 

in faithfully and truthfully fulfilling in My person the promises made 

to Abraham and David. But ye know him not, i.e., to be My Father, 

and (hat He sent Me to redeem the world. Or otherwise, " ye know 

Him not, ye do not obey, love, or worship Him, as though ye 

knew Him." So Theophylact. 

Ver. 29. But I know Him, for I am from Him, and He hath sent 

Me. "Born," saith S. Augustine, "by divine and eternal genera-

tion, inasmuch as I am His own proper and natural Son : 

" and He 

sent Me "into the world by My Incarnation." "See," saith Theo-

phylact, " the two natures in Christ set forth in this passage, for by 

His saying, ' I am of Him,' His Divine Substance is set forth ; but 

His human when He says, ' and He sent Me.' " Christ here refutes

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyK9sGORnRkf5dNUM-_MZGKkcztJIgJh4uJ3Fb-izLUiSuk1gdQWp1aiGRauAUXd7PrllIyFx0uR6EWNQZf6GjUkGDMA1jZbYPS_Jn5f9InQcFS-YUErVFG3fzXWoaLw7B6ADYF_Q=w615-h900-v0

cdf124aa-d90d-407a-a084-c6698b8d03ef

CHRIST'S DEATH VOLUNTARY. 279 

them of Jerusalem, who excused themselves for not believing in Him, 

because they knew His parents, whereas no one was to know the 

parents of Christ. For He shows that they knew not either His 

Divine generation from the Father, nor His human generation, by 

having been Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary ; and 

that this was no hindrance to their duty of believing in Him as 

the Messiah, even though His parentage were not known. 

Ver. 30. 

 

They therefore sought to take him, but no man laid hands 

on him. Who were they ? asks S. Chrysostom. Not the multitude, 

but the priests, who hated Jesus because the people preferred Him 

to them, and He was held to be the Messiah. Because his hour was 

not yet come, the hour at which He had resolved to die (says Theo-

phylact), for when He thought it the time for Him to suffer He gave 

Himself to His crucifiers. This manifestly shows the wisdom of 

the Saviour " in not wishing to die except at the fitting and suitable 

time which was destined for Him. For the passion of Christ was 

free and voluntary, not of force or compulsion. His hour means the 

hour chosen by Himself, and determined on for His death." S. Cyril 

here argues at length against the brethren who thought that some 

hours were favourable, and others unfavourable to man. For he 

teaches that times as well as men are subjected to and regulated 

by God's providence. 

Ver. 31. But many of the people, &c. For the people were more 

simple-minded, candid, and eager for their own salvation, than the 

priests, who hated Jesus, whom the people regarded as the Messiah, 

while they themselves were but little regarded; which greatly excited 

their hatred against Christ. When Christ comeih, &c. Why then 

should we not accept this man who is here as the Christ ? For it 

is prudence to prefer a certainty to an uncertainty, and the present 

to the future. For they had seen many miracles wrought, of which 

S. John says nothing, as having been related at length by the other 

Evangelists. So says S. Chrysostom, " The people conjectured rightly, 

being led, as it were, on their own feet to proper belief, through the 

greatness of what they had seen, but waiting for the teaching of the 

rulers respecting Christ;" and further on, "the head (as is said)

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwAf2-PiBzdyRSj7qKUzgJm6gLieMXy4FHuKPbq_Ym7TlEE5ciRMj2yjxLkbLGGLenFrJY4EoX-xQvqWPK-TbS3l2rzPIseAw7Xxy3ZNs5xGexcrMJacJtCfrloaaiDxOK4mgl22A=w615-h900-v0

31d62dd9-9802-4bb5-ba9c-169a2b43666d

280 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

became the tail. For the rulers simply follow, and consenting to the 

wickedness of the Pharisees make a headlong attack on Christ." 

Ver. 32.— The Pharisees heard, &c. As though He were exciting 

the people to sedition (Euthymius) ; but more truly from envy. The 

Greek adds " the chief priests." The Pharisees belonged to the 

Council, and accused Jesus before the chief priests, and drew them 

over to their resolve to kill Jesus. 

Ver. 33. 

 

Jesus therefore said unto them, &c, that is, to the officers 

of the chief priests, to win them over (says Chrysostom) by showing 

that He knew the cause of their coming, " and that they might tell 

it to their masters." " Yet a little while," I will not for long trouble 

your masters, for I am weary of dwelling with murderers. " I will fly 

from the ungodly," says Cyril. " I will preach for six months more 

among you, till the Passover. For then will be My time, appointed 

by the Father, to die for the salvation of the world. It is in vain 

that ye now seek to kill Me. Ye can do nothing against God's will. 

Ye are labouring in vain, and kicking against the pricks." Christ 

here displays His greatness of mind, and His divine foreknowledge 

and power, wherewith He laughs their efforts to scorn, and disperses 

them as spiders' webs. I go ; that is, I shall soon go, signifying that 

His death was voluntary, says Theophylact, quoting S. Chrysostom. 

It was in vain that they attempted violence against Him. " I go" 

means " I will go of My own accord and give up myself to you for 

bonds, scourging and death." To him that sent me. This signifies 

(1.) that He would go willingly, (2.) that the persecution of the rulers 

would do Him no hurt (so Chrysostom and Euthymius). (3.) He 

would alarm them, for, going to the Father, He would declare to Him 

their hatred towards Him, and demand punishment. So S. Chry-

sostom and S. Cyril. " In vain ye sharpen against Me the sword of 

wickedness. Ye will not make life subject to death ; I shall ascend 

into heaven, bearing before angels and men the accusation of your 

wickedness. For the first will wonder at His return, and the others, 

going forth to meet Him, will ask ' What are these wounds in Thy 

hands?' And I will answer, 'With these was I wounded in the 

house of Mv beloved"' (Zech. xiii. 6).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx7vpQAYrWIepK5Mgetrf2IsfGZPF67i4MYaJjHpd2gNrcqqdvrLu_JxHtdZkJRt5SIEZUYY55F2k81EGerQSRdUHs49AhMGr30aK16dIwHOpGdtGLKaqn2T2FBWeqVA1SGqdlfTg=w615-h900-v0

906170c8-e1dc-40b5-9828-0b2bb9a69456

THE GENTILES DISPERSED. 28 

 

Ver. 34.— Ye shall seek Me, &c. Ye will seek for another Messiah, 

but ye will not find Him, for there is no other Christ but Myself. 

So Toletus. But this is far from clear, and not to the point It means 

more plainly and simply : When ye hear that I have risen, and by 

My disciples am working miracles, ye will seek to kill Me again, 

and thus utterly extirpate My name and My religion. But ye will 

not find Me, for I shall ascend with glory into heaven, and though 

ye slay My Apostles, I will put others in their place to propagate 

My doctrine and Church through all the world. So Rupertus. 

But (4.) Jansen and others explain thus. After My death and 

ascension many of you who despised Me, will by the preaching of the 

Apostles desire to see and hear Me, but will not find Me because I 

go up to heaven. So Cyril, who teaches that a blessing should be em-

braced when present, lest afterward we should seek for it in vain. For 

opportunity has locks (of hair) in front (as is said), but is bald behind. 

Morally. Learn to admire and imitate Christ's calmness and 

patience in answering. " For,'' says S. Cyril, " a mind devoted to God ought to avoid all assaults of anger, and to take pleasure in gentle 

thoughts. Labour greatly to be versed in endurance, that thou 

mayest appear to all to bear adversities patiently, to have a gentle 

mind, and not to speak unseemly words even against thine enemies." 

Ver 

- H-— TheJews therefore said, &c. 

Ver. 36.— What is this saying that He said, . and where 1 

am, thitherye cannot come? That is to the Gentiles scattered through-

out the world. Hence the Epistles written to them are called 

Catholic or universal. The Jews scornfully termed the Gentiles 

" dispersed," whereas they themselves were gathered together in one 

spot, and again because they were " dispersed " among many errors 

and superstitions, while the Jews were united in one orthodox faith 

and served the one true and only God with one mind. 

The Jews did not understand Christ's meaning, because thev »1i>1 

not believe that He would go up again to heaven. Ami yot tho 

spake the truth, for when the Jews rejected the faith, the Aposilos 

transferred it to the Gentiles (see Acts xiii. 46). 

Ver. i-].—But in the last day, the great day oj the feast. &c. I lust

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy4xdo6J67NvXqof-HmDFwthvYwH96hFcz83xcrGaS4R71aBfXPqmJByH8DNMX_xX1hHw8zb3TOZMirAV_4QLr2y3n-RPH-hZrvfUl6tnDnXHMRL6kUk9J9dPGRHcxHTW0pVMJtvg=w615-h900-v0

d38a55de-913d-49fb-a370-3ef6b5ff70c0

282 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

was called the day of the assembly or gathering, when the people in 

a body went to the temple. Christ therefore wished to implant in 

the people, as they were departing, not merely a longing for Him-

self, and doubts respecting His religion, but to bring it keenly home 

to them, just as a preacher should do at the end of his discourse 

" Since they were going home," says S. Chrysostom, " He gives them 

saving food for their journey." 

Symbolically. The feast of tabernacles was joyful, and thus a 

type of the resurrection and joy of the blessed, to which Christ just 

before said He was going. So S. Cyril. 

Ifany one thirst for his own salvation, and a happy and blessed 

eternity (for these we should especially thirst for and desire, as the 

highest good), " let him come to Me" i.e., believe in Me, and draw 

from Me Gospel truth, yea the Holy Spirit Himself, with all His 

gifts and virtues, for He will lead him to heavenly glory, where all 

his desires will be fully satisfied (comp. Is. lv. i). 

Ver. 38. 

 

He that believeth in Me, as the Scripture saith, i.e., as he 

ought, by faith, moulded by love : he that so believeth as also to 

obey Me and My commands. 

Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Where is this 

said? (1.) Rupertus, S. Thomas, and S. Jerome say in Prov. v. 16, 

"Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad." (2.) F. Lucas in Is. 

lviii. 8, "Thou shalt be like a watered garden." (3.) Others say 

that it is stated not in one place, but in many, for the prophets 

everywhere foretell that the abundance of spiritual gifts which Christ 

would give, would be like showers of water. See Joel ii. 28 ; Is. 

xli. 18, xliv. 3. See also Ezek. xxxvi. 25, and Ecclus. xxiv. 40, 

Vulg., " I wisdom poured forth rivers," &c. (In Angl. verses 30, 

31), and Cant. iv. 15, "A fountain of gardens, a well of living 

waters, and streams from Lebanon." 

Out of his belly shall flow rivers oj living water. Rivers 

(say S. Ambrose and Theophylact), not a river, to denote the 

greatest abundance, force and efficacy of spiritual graces, as e.g., 

rivers of charity, of virginity, of martyrdoms and martyrs, of wisdom 

and of Christian eloquence. So S. Chrysostom, Rupertus, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwAlDcqOsEvfts4VAp7xodJ3uALCikB1zVBIESkf-SCzWAXL-U3bkoRmIuaU5BAqpvv0vcV2SS0DtHktpDuwzk0zL2_PiNKraXpvKbB_y_2fTT3dESQcIaKn1RKYHH7N9oTZpBMqA=w615-h900-v0

bc4f5242-1bc5-4d66-86c9-19ee97a596da

RIVERS OF GRACE. 283 

others. S. Gregory {Horn. x. on Ezek.) saith : "Because holy teach-

ings flow from the minds of the faithful, as streams of living waters 

from the belly of believers. For what is the belly, but the inner 

feelings of the mind, that is, right intention, holy desire, and a will 

which is humble towards God, and loving to its neighbour ? 

" 

" Consider," says S. Chrysostom, " the eloquence of Peter, the 

vehemence of Paul, and the wisdom of Stephen, for nothing escapes 

them as they speak, but they all go on as hurried forward by 

impetuously rushing streams." As was the case at Pentecost, when 

Peter poured forth the streams of his spirit, and by one discourse 

converted three, and by another five, thousand Jews to Christ. And 

hence S. Jerome (Ep. lxi. to Pammacheus) saith, "Paul was a chosen 

vessel, a trumpet of the Gospel, a roaring of a lion, a torrent of 

Christian eloquence : for as oft as I read him methinks I hear not 

words but thunders." And S. Chrysostom saith, " Paul is the heaven 

which hath the sun of righteousness, being himself a most pure and 

most profound sea of wisdom " {Horn iv. de laudibus S. Pauli). 

But observe that Christ is the fount of living water, that is of 

living and quickening grace, " For with Thee is the fountain of life 

" 

(Ps. xxxvi. 9), and if we drink of this fountain (i.e., if we believe in 

Christ and obey Him), He will be in us a fountain of water springing 

up into eternal life (see John iv. 14). This fountain is the Holy 

Spirit, or His abundant and plenteous grace. And from this foun-

tain dwelling in the soul, the countless and most perfect spiritual 

gilts and virtues flow, like rivers and streams, into the soul and body, 

into all their powers and acts, and reach even to those about them. 

For "the grace of the Spirit," saith Chrysostom, "when it enters and 

waters the mind, fertilises it more than any stream ; it never fails, 

never falls short, never stops." He therefore speaks of its indefectible 

abundance, and its wondrous operation, as a fountain and stream. 

"Faith, hope, and charity are streams of the Holy Spirit," says S 

Gregory, as S. John explains it below. 

Out of his belly. That is, the heart and mind. "The belly" (says 

S. Augustine) " is the conscience of the heart, for purified by this 

water, it will be itself a fountain. But the fountain is benevolence,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxk4YQxhYrI0ZfhHxfuoLjsWe2e1G2tOAZ34T6eX2P0akvBxmPY065_P426KTBth3JhpxRAimfmh3IjVjnQHrJcW8U6OiaGODzYKRjvZv3YNjNq4wNip_39NORDXhCjQDOxxfKZ6Q=w615-h900-v0

238c7ad9-d8d3-464b-9efe-ba8bf1c79140

284 S. JOHN., C. VII. 

which seeks the good of its neighbour, and therefore is not dried up, 

but ever flows. 

Shallflow. Abundantly, in virtuous acts, by the operations and 

impulses of the Holy Spirit, to lead not only themselves but others 

also to heaven. For the spring of this spiritual stream is in heaven, 

and it flows back to its original source, and carries back thither 

spiritual men with it (see chap. iv. 1 4). 

Living waters. Not stagnant waters, but flowing and springing up. 

Abundance of living waters. (1.) Charity (S. Augustine). (2.) 

Spiritual joy (see Ps. xlvi.) (S. Basil). (3.) Evangelical doctrine (S. 

Ambrose). (4.) Heavenly happiness and glory, which S. John com-

pares to the river of the water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding 

out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb (Rev. xxii. 1). (5.) A 

fount of all grace and glory, all gifts of the Holy Spirit (so S. 

Chrysostom, Cyril, Origen, &c.) 

Ver. 39. 

 

But this spake He of the Spirit which they that believe on 

Him should receive. After His death, and by His merits at Pente-

cost, for before that the Apostles had not received it so copiously 

and abundantly as at that time ; and they at once watered the 

parched earth by the streams of their preaching and virtue, fertilised 

it by their good works, inebriated it by the love of God, and inun-

dated it with all virtues, by means of the living water of Christian 

grace, life, and doctrine. 

For the Spirit was not yet given, i.e., the Holy Spirit was not yet 

given so copiously, because Jesus was not yet glorified. But why was 

not the Holy Spirit given visibly and abundantly before His Ascen-

sion? (1.) S. Leo says, "In order that this gift and pouring forth 

of the Holy Spirit might be acknowledged as the fruit of His Passion, 

Ascension and Triumph. Just as kings give largesses to their 

people on occasions of great joy, as triumphs and so forth. (See 

Acts ii. 33.) "His Ascension" (says S. Leo) "was the cause of His 

giving His Holy Spirit." (2.) The sending of the Spirit was the 

glorification of Christ. For the Spirit by the greatness of His gifts 

wondrously set forth the glory of Christ. For He wrought so many 

miracles by the Apostles, as to convert the whole world to Christ.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwgzGZVRqNRTdEj4WId3SHnICpo2-fGs1RefmRr5Xgy9IrxnV-J81NbkanpxCLbwmEbE-JsBzbarDheoeQWgkgQtqHu31L1zjHxYY3eluwdZy2snTV46uxSXnj6ZQ1NY3PX5SBUCA=w615-h900-v0

ad417f51-99dd-4363-bd9a-98aa4243583b

MANIFOLD FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT. 285 

(3.) Because the disciples before the Ascension were not able to 

receive so great a gift, having such carnal notions of Christ. (4.) 

S. Augustine (in loc\ " He willed not to give the Spirit till after His 

Resurrection, in order that our charity might glow for the Resurrec-

tion, and being separated from the world may run wholly towards 

Him." And S. Cyril, "Christ then became the Principle of our 

renewed nature, when, counting as nothing the bands of death, He 

rose again." And again, "There was in the Prophets a certain 

rich brightness of the Holy Spirit, and a light shining before them, 

to guide them to the knowledge of things to come. But to those 

who believed in Christ, there was not only the Holy Spirit, as a 

light to lead them on the way, but He dwelt within them, as if in 

His temple." 

For then streams of grace not only flowed, but poured down 

from heaven, not merely on a few, but on very many of the faithful. 

From thence there flowed forth such thousands of martyrs, who 

nobly endured the rack, the flames and the lions ; so many bands of 

virgins victoriously contending even to death for their Christian 

virginity ; so many swarms of monks and anchorets who in monas-

teries and deserts lived separate from the world and for God, as 

men of heaven, and angels upon earth ; so many orders of Pontiffs 

and Prelates, who governed most holily the churches committed to 

them, and moulded them to perfect sanctity ; such bands of Doctors, 

Preachers and Confessors, who scattered on every side their streams 

of doctrine and holy living, by their teaching, preaching and 

writings, enlightening the whole world with the knowledge of God, 

and enkindling it by His love ; of whom it is said, " He shall pour 

forth as showers his wise sentences " (Ecclus. xxxix. 6). And lastly, 

so many myriads of the faithful, both men and women, who living 

soberly, justly and godly in this world, eagerly looked, and still look 

for the glorious coming of our Great God and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

Is not this great and unending glory to Jesus Christ ? 

Ver. 42.—Doth not the Scripture say, &c. As Micah foretold. 

But Jesus is not the Christ as having been conceived and brought 

up at Nazareth. But He was born at Bethlehem, and since they

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxtfX9NgLvPjgipIwiGpLBWFWDXsqxbeY9OHxBYJ94nEDUtU2D5TiKn8vat2ma6pcllgnUHWcWdzbaqPUX7sbTccS9_3izLlcnfG-2S7K23Y2Jx4SJpEXxs30naXCMQg75gksCIgQ=w615-h900-v0

d4383a70-ebac-45dc-80e1-0d3cbd706b14

286 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

had seen so many evident signs of His Messiahship, they were 

bound to inquire more carefully into this point which seemed to be 

wanting. And had they done so, they would have understood the 

truth, and would have known that His being a Galilean was no 

objection to His being the Christ ; but the people from indolence, 

and the Scribes from envy of Him, would not investigate the matter, 

and were both accordingly inexcusable. 

Ver. 43.— .Si? there was a division among the people because of Him. 

Some accusing Him of being an innovator, others excusing Him, 

and lauding Him as a Prophet. 

Ver. 44. 

 

And some of them ivoidd have taken Him, i.e., some of 

the multitude, not of the rulers, who were all of one mind not to 

acknowledge Him. But the officers who were sent for the purpose 

wished to apprehend Him. 

But no man laid hands on Him. For Christ withheld them by 

His power of spirit, and the majesty of His countenance, much 

more by His Divine Power. And, moreover, the hour for His suffer-

ing had not yet come. So Cyril. 

Ver. 45. The officers therefore came, &c. As to the masters who 

had sent them. 

And they said unto them, Why have ye not brought Him ? Their 

coming was a greater thing than to have remained with Christ, for 

they would thus have been spared annoyance from them, but now 

they became heralds of Christ, and became more bold in their 

bearing, says S. Chrysostom. 

Him, that innovator, deceiver, and false prophet. They deigned 

not to call Jesus by His own name. 

Ver. 46. The officers answered, &c. Because He was God-man, 

and therefore He teaches not with human but Divine grace, power 

efficacy and majesty. Notice here the force of Christ's words, His 

authority and dignity, which astounded these officers, who, though 

willing, were not able to take Him, nay were obliged to love, rever-

ence and honour Him ; and to profess as much to their masters 

though most hostile to Christ. " Proving," says Cyril, " how rash 

and weak it is to fight against Christ." "They might certainly have

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy9d_AFTYt5I9TjEOdD0BxbPibn6AO6oLROPGSBdaG8Fms24QY8jZ97b8w8IweKR0XDGKVFQDc_hLmC6seZjkIYeGCD58lVvjV0L_xf8Tf1hjs9uqJgwgJH6LYKhFvqr-JHihumhA=w615-h900-v0

96c19d51-f220-45dc-b840-cd7c773ed99a

FAITH OF THE OFFICERS. 287 

excused themselves (says S. Chrysostom) " by saying we dared not 

take Him, lest we should rouse to sedition against ourselves the 

multitude who favoured Him." For they seemed not so much to 

admire Him, as to blame those who had sent them to seize Him, 

whom they ought rather to have listened to. Why sent ye us to 

seize so great a teacher ? We have been captivated by the power 

of His words, and ye, if ye had heard Him yourselves, would have 

been captivated also. They spake not to please their masters, but 

to witness to the truth. Such is the power of truth. It is therefore 

probable that many of them were afterwards fully converted to 

Christ at Pentecost. For God seems to have rewarded in this way 

their sincere and noble testimony to Christ. " They were laudably 

led astray," says the Gloss, " in passing over to the faith from the 

evil of unbelief." S. Cyril supposes that they suspected Him to be 

God. " How then could we take Him, who is as far above us as 

God is above man ? " 

Ver. 47. 

 

The Pharisees therefore answered, Are ye also deceived'? 

"They were Christ's implacable enemies," says Nonnus. "When they ought to have felt compunction, and to change their opinion," 

says Chrysostom, " they accuse the officers. But in mild terms, 

for fear they also should at the last fail them." But they ought to 

have asked what there was so wonderful in Jesus' words. But they 

took care not to do that, by their blind and obstinate hatred against 

Him. S. Cyril enforces it thus, " We may pardon the multitude for 

being deceived, but how could ye, who are our officers, and infected 

with the same incredulity with ourselves, how could you be so 

quickly led astray as to believe in Him?" Ver. 48. Have any of the rulers or Pharisees believed in Him ? 

And consequently He is not the Christ. An argument from 

authority, but yet a fallacy. For these rulers and Pharisees were 

the sworn enemies of Christ, because He reproved their sins. But 

yet some of the rulers secretly believed in Him, as Nicodemus. 

As S. Augustine wisely says, "They who knew not the law, believed 

on Him who had sent the law, and they who taught the law 

despised Him who had sent it, that the saying might be fulfilled,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz33F7OcUZ-2Kp1rC1oXM7gbe64fSsTqi0qFtT5y0AxNUUmr2E_65nq5qZAU4dR_EIvuiPiyMpal9X6SYlrCAGgcKU9rTjhiDPN-njik-5Bk7apP0oM3zR-xc1QHxN-i0ma0ZzT3g=w615-h900-v0

cf9861fe-6f08-442c-8ee4-162892db8f3a

288 S. JOHN, C. VII. 

' I am come that they which see not may see, and that they which 

see might be made blind.' 

 

Ver. 49. 

 

But this people who knowcth not the Law are cursed. In 

passing, i.e., from Moses and the law to Jesus and the gospel. 

By this term the Pharisees endeavour to terrify the officers and 

others, and to turn them away from the faith and love of Jesus. 

"They are deserving" (says Theophylact) "of many curses for 

being unbelieving themselves, and the authors of unbelief in others." 

As says S. Cyril, "Wise men by boasting become fools. For while 

they profess that they know the law, they accuse themselves of 

unbelief," and of ignorance also, in not acknowledging Christ, who 

was promised by the law, and who then stood before them. (See 

Deut. xviii. 19.) 

Vers. 50, 51. 

 

Nicodemus saith unto them, &c. The law of Moses, 

(Deut. xiv. 14) and the law of nature,—Nicodemus accuses his col-

leagues of being the violators of both laws. But he does so in a 

quiet way, for fear of their anger. For, as S. Augustine saith, " For 

he hoped if they would only hear Him patiently, they would become 

like those officers who were sent to take Christ, but preferred to 

believe on Him." And further Cyril asserts that Nicodemus said this 

as pricked by his conscience. Still labouring under a fatal bashful-

ness, and not combining boldness of speech with his zeal, he exposes 

not to view the faith which was inherent in him. But vesting himself 

in a cloke of simulation, he was a kind of secret defender of Christ. 

Though it is the duty of believers without fear or shame to profess 

the true faith, as S. Paul said, " I am not ashamed of the Gospel of 

Christ," &c. (Rom. i. 16). 

Ver. 52. They answered, &c. And thou, as being of the same 

country, dost thou favour and defend Him ? 

Search (the Scriptures, Vulg.) and see that out of Galilee ariseth no 

prophet. They reply insolently, as though he knew not the Scrip-

tures. Attend to us and learn. " They insult him," says Theophy-

lact; "go and learn, for up to this time thou hast not learned that 

out of Galilee ariseth no prophet." This was not true. For Deborah 

was of Galilee (Judges iv. 4-6), and Anna of the tribe of Aser

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxmLOrSPN2WwIQasx-GX5JLas8_pFUn_rQBWrrokMe3SMta0ddIivtI5QIyKsv3CtdDLLkpnjUcea7wQpuoKplW0kvvnbcb4yUFUqFk1SBmYXMEpKJiE_l7PY2sbDoGjDbIyBzIAw=w615-h900-v0

5f8b6159-a59e-47b1-8a3f-e178e63c0cc3

GALIL/EAN PROPHETS. 289 

(Luke ii. 36), and Nahum the Elkoshite from Elkosh, a city in 

Galilee. And in Samaria which adjoined Galilee there were many 

Prophets, as Elijah, Elisha, and the hundred which Obadiah hid 

in a cave. 

2. It is rash to assert that because, up to that time, no Prophet 

had arisen from Galilee, none would afterwards arise. 

3. It was foolish, because Nicodemus had never said that Jesus 

was a Prophet, but merely that He should not be condemned with-

out being heard ; but they were so blinded by hatred, as to do 

many rash and foolish things contrary to reasonable judgment. 

Ver. 53. 

 

And every one went to his own house. " Fearing lest 

any one else should support Nicodemus," says Euthymius. They 

therefore deferred their intention of killing Jesus, but did not revoke 

it. God brought about this delay, by means of Nicodemus, because 

the ordained hour had not come. 

vol. rv.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyh5T0iOYJylVjb2xd65vgIzjgTU0Msiu_YfsFQ_Yre0Qu_UJ1sgCjywNCXgXSDtXhqVneieakznNBYvTbtaOfWKKA3yKQ8b_ww-ZKL9jWyCSsUGz6Tuym_75t-M2gXKymANyZl=w615-h900-v0

cbfa3e9c-8f2b-45d0-8086-2e49014974c7

( 290 ) 

CHAPTER VIII. 

I Jsus absolved the woman taken in adultery. 12 Proclaims Himself to be the 

light of the world. 25 Asserts Himself to be 'the beginning' and that He 

frees those that believe in Him, but that the Jews were the servants of sin ( ver. 34) 

and children of the devil (ver. 44). 49 When the Jews accused Him of having 

a devil, He answered that He had not a devil, but that He honoured His 

heavenly Father. 55 He declares that He was before Abraham, and hid Him-

selffrom the Jews, who consequently sought to stone Him. 

JESUS went unto the mount of Olives. 

2 And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the 

people came unto him ; and he sat down, and taught them. 

3 And the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery 

 

and when they had set her in the midst, 

4 They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very 

act. 

5 Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned : but what 

sayest thou ? 

6 This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus 

stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them 

not. 

7 So, when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and said unto them, 

He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. 

8 And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. 

9 And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out 

one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last : and Jesus was left alone, 

and the woman standing in the midst. 

10 When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said 

unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers ? hath no man condemned thee ? 

11 She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn 

thee : go, and sin no more. 

12 IT Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world 

 

he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. 

13 The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself ; thy 

record is not true. 

14 Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my 

record is true : for I know whence I came, and whither I go ; but ye cannot tell 

whence I come, and whither I go. 

15 Ye judge after the flesh ; I judge no man. 

16 And yet if I judge, my judgment is true ; for I am not alone, but I and the 

Father that sent me.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwUqM8d8dNpVQBfvFg5iyRAI44peuDDTgzkBrzv_0FtleCeF9MXp3sTbdhDYvNdzeq5lOho6H3UWjF7q80j990VjgkEtejolcDNcenjqRc36sa0T_5U-eT84feAY7tqpuCzL3xw=w615-h900-v0

caa52027-db1b-4a21-8bc3-80ca519f9211

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. 29 

 

17 It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. 

18 I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth 

witness of me. 

19 Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither 

know me, nor my Father : if ye had know me, ye should have known my Father 

also. 

. , 

20 These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple 

: 

and 

no man laid hands on him ; for his hour was not yet come. 

21 Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and 

shall die in your sins : whither I go, ye cannot come. 

22 Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself ? because he saith, Whither I go 

ye cannot come. 

23 And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath ; I am from above : ye are of 

this world : I am not of this world. 

24 I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins : for if ye believe not 

that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. 

25 Then said they unto him, Who art thou ? And Jesus saith unto them, Even 

the same that I said unto you from the beginning. 

26 I have many things to say and to judge of you : but he that sent me is true ; 

and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him. 

27 They understood not that he spake to them of the Father. 

28 Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then 

shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself ; but as my Father 

hath taught me, I speak these things. 

29 And he that sent me is with me : the Father hath not left me alone ; for I 

do always those things that please him. 

30 As he spake these words, many believed on him. 

31 Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my 

word, then are ye my disciples indeed 

; 

32 And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. 

33 IT They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage 

to any man : how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free? 

34 Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth 

sin is the servant of sin. 

35 And the servant abideth not in the house for ever : but the Son abideth 

ever. 

36 If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. 

37 I know that ye are Abraham's seed ; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. 

38 I speak that which I have seen with my Father : and ye do that which ye 

have seen with your father. 

39 They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto 

them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham 40 But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I 

have heard of God : this did not Abraham. 

41 Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of 

fornication 

; we have one Father, even God. 

42 Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me : for I 

proceeded forth and came from God ; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxVgenZAzN5i2QIz7w54Anm5hLc23AtEgu_oiG1QOm4g7Fm8JguXZ2_EY7SrMlDuLGHSEs7CIv7QQx3DPU5SsaNY4BxKaGqFGV8pZXAcvQcL2eSkYrdvdVdWa-g_toQk1t8Hxd9WA=w615-h900-v0

76903663-78b5-4cb9-ad84-1a4c4beb407f

292 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

43 Why do ye not understand my speech 1 even because ye cannot hear my word. 

44 Ye are ofyour father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is 

no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own : for he is a 

liar, and the father of it. 

45 And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. 

46 Which of you convinceth me of sin ? And if I say the truth, why do ye not 

believe me ? 

47 He that is of God heareth God's words : ye therefore hear them not, because 

ye are not of God. 

48 Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art 

a Samaritan, and hast a devil ? 

49 Jesus answered, I have not a devil ; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me. 

50 And I seek not mine own glory : there is one that seeketh and judgeth. 

51 Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see 

death. 

52 Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abra-

ham is dead, and the prophets ; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he 

shall never taste of death. 

53 Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead ? and the prophets 

are dead : whom makest thou thyself? 

54 Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing : it is my Father 

that honoureth me ; of whom ye say, that he is your God : 

55 Yet ye have not known him ; but I know him : and if I should say, I know 

him not, I shall be a liar like unto you : but I know him, and keep his saying. 

56 Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day : and he saw it, and was glad. 

57 Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou 

seen Abraham ? 

58 Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, 

I am. 

59 Then took they up stones to cast at him : but Jesus hid himself, and went 

out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by. 

Ver. 1. ButJesus went unto the Mount of Olives. On the last day 

of the Feast Jesus had taught in the temple, and confuted the 

Pharisees, while they, after their wont, returned home to a sumptu-

ous banquet. But no one showed hospitality to Jesus for fear of 

the rulers and Pharisees. He went therefore probably to Geth-

semane, to continue there all night in prayer (see xviii. 1, 2, and 

Matt. xxvi. 36). Food was either secretly sent Him by Martha 

from Bethany, or bought by the disciples at Jerusalem. He selected 

this spot as His nightly refuge, or rather His place of prayer, six 

months before His death, and used to retire there to pray by night

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwzvCoO5oIoL9qYnDmfEsKceNVSGt3eRoKGhj4rMr-UcKCIzRId7khiJ9QfpxaqInWE7UJx4M6_0TdwE9tLMTB31T3qqc1oJLDujWrJUtqxFXQUhfMtELGF27VWYOI5vUUKOEXG=w615-h900-v0

05469a21-85e6-46b2-82ab-3dc68a9140f2

PUNISHMENT OF ADULTERY. 293 

(see Matt. xxvi. 36). The Mount of Olives was a type of Christ's 

sorrow, when He there prayed for the pardon of sinners : as the 

feast of tabernacles signified that He and His people are but 

strangers and pilgrims here, on their way to their heavenly country, 

travelling from the wealthy and splendid city Jerusalem, to the 

mountain of heavenly refreshment. 

Ver. 2. 

 

And early in the morning, &c. He gave the night to 

prayer, the day to teaching, setting an example to apostolic men, as 

S. Paul, S. Francis Xavier, and others. 

Vers. 3, 4, 5. 

 

But the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto Him a 

woman taken in adultery, &c. Now Moses in the Law commanded 

us that such should be stoned. This story is not found in the 

Greek Fathers, but as it is found in the Vulgate and thus 

approved by the Council of Trent, Cornelius a Lapide regards 

it as canonical. 

Here note that the Mosaic law ordered adulteresses to be killed. 

But the rulers ordered them to be stoned, according to the Rab-

binical tradition. For the Law ordered a betrothed woman should 

be stoned, if she had committed adultery, and thence the Scribes 

extended this punishment to an adulterous wife. But the punish-

ment of stoning (Lev. xx. 10) is to be extended to all the cases 

mentioned in that chapter. (See also Ezek. xvi. 38, 40.) And 

this is clear from the History of Susanna, where, by the law of 

requital, her false accusers were stoned. This was also the punish-

ment of adulteresses in many heathen nations. (See notes on Gen. 

xxxviii. 24, and Num. v. adfin.) 

Ver. 6. This they said, tempting Him, that they might have to 

accuse Him, as being opposed to the law, if He said that she was 

not to be stoned, but as cruel and harsh if He said otherwise. 

But they rather supposed He would not order her to be stoned, 

"in order to keep up His appearance of gentleness, and not to 

lose the favour of the people." So Rupertus, Bede, and S. 

Augustine, who says, " They saw that He was very gentle ; they said 

therefore among themselves, If He rules that she be let go, He will 

not observe that righteousness which the Law enjoins. But not

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAww69U_DRG5e6HipDFxPlCcVopJvCRagwQjWCdi1MaDNj2F0SUdXX8Qi43NxjA1sGRqf5HFT6HNqxmH8kXLdscqb7SH_1Rtma98uAc3aWiO7T81x0ZSoNl4QY0PpAFFN2luD6si=w615-h900-v0

1b3ca394-9068-421b-9020-c4ea3e6a0f33

294 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

to lose His (character for) gentleness, by which He has already won 

the love of the people, He will say that she ought to be released. 

And we shall hence find occasion to accuse Him. But the Lord 

in His answer both observed justice, and did not forego His gentle-

ness." They thought to accuse Him of violating the law by her 

acquittal, and would say to Him, says S. Augustine, " Thou art an 

enemy of the law, thou judgest contrary to Moses, or rather against 

Him who gave the law. Thou art guilty of death, and must be 

stoned together with her.' 

But Jesus stooped down, and with His finger wrote on the ground. 

To turn away His face, not so much from the adulteress as from her 

accusers, as if to say, "Why do ye bring her before Me, who am not 

a civil judge, but the physician and Saviour of sinners?" So S. 

Augustine. Some Greek MSS. add fi>n vgoswoiovfiivos, not attending to 

them and their accusations. Though Toletus and others translate, 

"not pretending, but really writing on the ground." Either mean-

ing is suitable. 

(2.) Christ refers to Jer. xvii. 1. "The sin of Judah is written 

with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond," and as S. 

Augustine, S. Jerome and others say more fittingly on verse 13, 

"They that depart from thee, shall be written in the earth." 

Jeremiah has here painted you, O Scribes, to the life. Ye accuse this 

adulteress, but ye have committed greater sins than hers 

; 

ye deserve 

punishment rather than she doth 

; 

ye deserve to be stoned more 

than she does, even to be cast into hell. For your sins of rebellion, 

unbelief, obstinacy, and persecution against Me are indelible, written 

as it were with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, because 

ye have forsaken the Lord and turned your back upon Him, there-

fore has He in His turn turned His back upon you." (See Jer. xviii. 

17.) Ye have neglected heavenly, and followed after worldly goods, 

and therefore ye will speedily pass away with them, just as that 

which is written in the earth soon comes to nothing by a breath of 

wind, and by the foot passing over it. Ye have departed from God, 

and therefore ye will not be written in Heaven, but on the earth, 

yea in its very centre, in hell itself. (See S. Augustine Lib. iv. di.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy9efsbo5LkOcN_y-qtyxNVuOi4BfT_47roKAvboD9P2bwmprEQZkqor2j9790nWpo3XEP1RNeYVZ8RWPPgJaK2WNJpiXBzKy1Lg_IJxoQw5rNdCgrmGWeykZDrx54EcHH6sFKrPQ=w615-h900-v0

b3ed4c68-ca8d-4015-8af5-004b5b150330

WHAT CHRIST WROTE ON THE GROUND. 29$ 

Consen. Evang., cap 10.) And S. Ambrose (Ep. lxxvi. ad Studitem.) 

says, " He wrote on the ground, for sinners are written on the earth, 

the just in heaven." Symbolically, S. Augustine (as above) gives 

two other reasons. (1.) To show that He worked miracles on earth, 

for, though God, He humbled Himself to become man, for miracles 

are signs which are wrought on earth. (2.) To point out that the 

time had now come for His law to be written on the fruitful earth, 

not on barren stones. (3.) He adds here (Tract, xxxiii.) a third 

reason, that it was to signify that it was He who had written the 

old law on tables of stone, but that the new law was to be written 

on the productive earth. But what did Christ write ? He could not 

in the paved court of the temple cut out the shape of the letters, 

but merely delineate them with His finger. But He seems to have 

marked out something to put them to shame, or to expose their sin. 

For He added, in explanation of what He had done, " He that is 

without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." S. Jerome 

even says that He wrote the mortal sins of the Scribes and of all 

men (Lib. ii. Contra Pelag.), S. Ambrose (Ep. lvi.) that He wrote 

Jer. xxii. 29 ; and (Epist. lxxix.) that He wrote among other words, 

Thou seest the mote in thy brother's eye, but seest not the beam in thine 

own. Others think that He wrote " Mene, Mene" (Dan. v. 25). 

But nothing certain can be stated. 

Ver. 7.— When therefore they continued asking Him. Because they 

did not see clearly what He had written, or pretended they did not. 

They therefore urge Him to reply explicitly to their captious 

question, believing that He could not escape from the horns of a 

dilemma by going against the law if He acquitted the woman or 

against His own compassion, were He to condemn her. 

He lifted up Himselfand said, He that is without sin among you, 

let him first cast a stone at her. Ye Scribes and Pharisees have com-

mitted greater sins than this woman, as your conscience testifies 

 

do not therefore so rigidly and importunately urge her condemna-

tion, but rather have pity for her, as sinners for a sinner, as guilty 

for a guilty one, as criminals for a criminal. For otherwise, if ye 

condemn her, ye ought to condemn yourselves ; if ye wish to stone

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxQFfbw7MiIyePWCvP2wcoiOF-dAu-h5gD9uvc5Ai3EUobm4zWwLKQaFyP6sQCtYNqd-1IieR6mhBeHaQaCGiJYiYCUiW1tqG3IwYK05iC9NSPHa6slXxH1zpk_fpNAP2FUBPGvKg=w615-h900-v0

ec770b44-6e41-42ee-96ba-ee945dc71ee5

296 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

her, ye yourselves ought to be stoned, nay more, to be burned. 

Observe Christ's prudence. He maintains the law in conceding 

that an adulteress was guilty of death, but adds that the Scribes 

should not so pertinaciously urge her death, but rather have com-

passion on her, since outwardly professing sanctity, but inwardly 

conscious of greater sins, they should wish indulgence to be shown 

to themselves both by God and man. So S. Augustine. "Ye 

have heard, Let the law be fulfilled, let the adulteress be stoned. 

But in punishing her must the law be fulfilled by those who deserve 

punishment?" And again, "Jesus said not, Let her not be stoned; 

lest He should seem to speak against the law. But be it far from 

Him to say, Let her be stoned ; for He came not to destroy that 

which He had formed, but to save that which had perished. What 

then answered He ? ' He who is without sin of you,' &c. O answer 

of wisdom ! How did He make them look unto themselves ! They 

brought charges against others, they did not carefully search out 

themselves within." "What more divine," says S. Ambrose, "than 

that saying, that He should punish sin who is Himself devoid of it ? 

For how couldest thou endure one who punishes another's sin, and 

defends his own? For does he not condemn himself the more, 

who condemns in another what he himself commits ? 

" 

But thou wilt say Christ here seems to do away with the use ot 

tribunals of justice, and their strictness. But I answer, Christ 

launched not this sentence against judges, but only against the 

Scribes, who as private persons contended that Christ should take 

on Himself to judge the adulteress, and condemn her according to 

law. This He refused to do, and having been sent to save, and 

not to condemn sinners, He retorted it upon themselves, as follows 

; 

"If ye are not judges, and yet are so desirous of punishing this 

adultery, take it upon yourselves, stone the adulteress, if ye are so 

pure and holy as not to have committed adultery, or any other sin ; 

 

for if the Scribes had condemned her to be stoned, Jesus would not 

have freed her from the punishment she justly deserved. More-

over, it is the judge's duty to condemn a criminal, when convicted, 

though conscious that he is himself guilty of the same or a similar

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhXiw1btf5eohr8GYYK3S8JVb1LAd0-Ufcjpe6iGWsQZhWDu_tSdKLQbctqpKs3kMOr0PIoFlwOtenNwOkCAy3PynZ93xzzVGFj7r005b5_Ki7o_zR9u5r1nDKyrms-0U2VwoPGA=w615-h900-v0

7c536d88-0533-4446-8385-66c410267825

THE VOICE OF CONSCIENCE. 2$; 

offence And yet, if guilty himself it is unseemly in him to con-

demn another for a like offence. 

Christ then in these words quietly advises judges to lead innocent 

lives themselves. As a moral rule, Christ teaches us that we ought 

to judge ourselves before we judge others. S. Gregory {Moral. 

Lib. 13. cap. iv.) gives the reason. " For he who judges not him-

self in the first place, knows not how to pass right judgment on 

another. For his own conscience supplies no rule to go by. These 

Scribes then are summoned first to look within, and find out their 

own faults, before reproving others." On which head there are well-

known proverbs. " First prune thy own vineyards," &c. 

Ver 8. And again stooping down He wrote on the ground. Both to 

inspire them with shame, and also to give the Scribes time to with-

draw creditably. So S. Jerome {Lib. ii. contra Pelag.), and Bede, who 

adds, " He saw that they were staggered, and would be more likely to 

retire at once than to put any more questions." 

Ver. 9. 

 

But on hearing this they went out one by one. Some 

Greek copies add, " Convicted by their own conscience" as being 

adulterers, or even worse. For what Jesus said was true, and ought 

to strike home to them. And hence S. Augustine says {Epist. liv.), 

" Methinks that even the husband himself who had been wronged, 

would on hearing these words have shrunk back from his desire for 

punishment" 

" Went out. " By their very withdrawal," says S. Augustine, 

" confessing that they were guilty of like offences. For they were 

smitten with a keen sense of justice on looking within, and finding 

themselves guilty." They feared also lest Christ should proceed still 

further to expose their crimes. 

Beginning at the eldest. As being more inveterate sinners, like 

the false accusers of Susanna, or because they first felt the force of 

His words. As says S. Ambrose, " They first felt the strength of His 

answer, which they could not reply to, and being quicker of appre-

hension, they were the first to go away." 

And He was left alone, &c. " Two were left," says S. Augustine, 

" misery and commiseration ; 

" deep calling upon deep, the depth of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxwKn6GMMPaNT5pyXMRvYCaFJgNsBXyF4hjC_wmojYT87oOMum-1A1G2VhJ5INuvQWNxGuTl7IL2fwZWFTEMkjnIWCyrzY44qyCx3vvCEViMFJiyqWcko36JVvl7pSXn8POwndnzA=w615-h900-v0

4ae7eb2c-f898-45ef-af88-bb522a486c2e

298 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

her misery on the depth of His compassion. But she fled not, as 

having experienced His grace, and hoping for more. 

Ver. 10.— When Jesus had lifted up Himself, &c. Lifting up on 

her His eyes of gentleness, as He had repulsed His adversaries with 

the words of righteousness, as saith S. Augustine. He spoke to her, 

(i.) to show that He had driven away her accusers, and that she 

could acknowledge what Jesus had, in His mercy, done for her, 

a.nd ask pardon from Him of her sin. (2.) That He might the more 

readily absolve her, because her accusers had withdrawn their charge, 

and had fled away, as doubting the justice of their cause. 

Ver. 11. 

 

She said, No man, Lord, &c. I who am alone free from 

all sin, and appointed by God to judge the world, might most justly 

condemn thee. But I do not, because I came not to judge, but to 

save the world. Thus S. Ambrose ; " See how He moderated His 

answer, so that the Jews could not accuse him for acquitting her 

 

but rather throw it back on themselves, if they chose to complain. 

For she is dismissed, not absolved ; inasmuch as no one accused her, 

she was not acquitted as innocent. Why then should they com-

plain who had already withdrawn from prosecuting the charge and 

from enforcing the punishment ? Moreover Christ by these words 

absolved the woman not only in open court before the people, 

but in the court of heaven, before God, as is plain from what He 

subjoins. Go, as being certain that I have forgiven thy adultery. 

As He said to the Magdalene, " Go in peace " (Luke vii. 50). But 

Christ says not that openly, but secretly ; lest the Pharisees should 

have something to carp at. Christ therefore inspired in her secret 

sorrow for her sins and an act of contrition, and then pardoned her 

sins, condoning her sin and its punishment together. " He condemns 

not," says S. Ambrose, " as being our Redemption, but reproves her 

as our life, and cleanses her as our fountain." And Euthymius, 

" Such an exposure and shame before so many adversaries was a 

sufficient punishment, more especially when He knew that she was 

heartily penitent." So Jansen and others. 

Andsin no more. Returning as a dog to its vomit. For thou wilt 

thus in thy ingratitude sin more grievously, and wilt defile thy soul 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhYYZUEkXWyOLs4yn0LDKRTBosyab5aXksu4xtB3LpbV0TLesDKU2D_nDWdtx0uwPYCoM06R-wBYgutwlDCe5jFrubkTT4Vxn1uWGPu0n7sm2NZIDllTpTxPpxE_zn7-t4jOBa8Q=w615-h900-v0

80933d07-7b02-4480-a23d-3bb5bc894eea

THE UNCREATED LIGHT. 299 

and though I do not condemn thee, yet will I certainly condemn 

thee in the day of judgment. Hear S. Augustine. " What means, 

Iwillnot condemn thee 1 Dost Thou, O L -3rd, favour sin ? Assuredly 

not ; for listen to what follows, Go and sin no more. The Lord there-

fore condemned the sin, but not the person. For else He would have 

said, Go and live as thou wilt, being sure of my forgiveness." To 

which Bede adds, " Since He is pitiful and tender He forgives the 

past; but as just, and loving justice, He forbids her sin any more." 

Ver. 12. 

 

Then saidJesus again unto them, 1 am the Light of the 

world. The Gloss connects these words with what had immediately 

preceded, in this way : —" He adds what His Divinity could effect, in 

order that no one should doubt His power of forgiving sin." Marvel 

not that I set free the adulteress from the darkness of sin, for I am 

the uncreated Light of the world, i.e., God. And He adds below 

(ver. 15), " Ijudge no one;" I neither sentence nor acquit the woman 

in a human court, but in the court of heaven. But others refer 

back His words to verse 2, where His discourse had been broken off 

by the Scribes. Having put them to shame, He resumes His teach-

ing. So S. Chrysostom and others. S. Chrysostom adds, " The Jews 

objected to Cfirist that He was a Galilean ; He shows that He was 

not merely one of the Prophets, but the Lord of heaven and earth." 

lam the Light of the world ; and hence the Manicheans thought 

that He was the sun. And S. Augustine, being a Platonist, at one 

time had his doubts about it (see Euchir. lviii.) But commenting 

on this passage He mentions and confutes their folly. " Christ the 

Lord was not the sun which was made, He was its Maker, ' For all 

things were made by Ifim,' &c. He therefore is the Light, which 

made this light of ours. Let us love It, let us long to understand It, 

let us thirst for It, that so at length we may attain to the Light 

Itself, and so live therein that we may never die. For He is the 

Light, of whom the Psalmist foretold, ' Thou shalt save both man 

and beast, so multifold is Thy mercy.'" And further on, "By 

this Light was the light of the sun made, and the Light which made 

the sun (beneath which He made us also) was made beneath 

the sun for our sakes. He, I say who made the sun. Despise not

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzzoTTncLLjSm0s07VAZCZivrtI44R5Rx0rW69bJXGMevEjNMzeCKjFYDvvzbX5aK6oH8HreC4vtDAynrFXsQzic_l4iUaHt_BFhxUt2r3qruMUEpWnK6bt1Hl-0aFvuKmWdBjgOg=w615-h900-v0

9a1c73e8-1108-4514-8675-bbab7aabb794

300 s. JOHN, c. VIII. 

the veil (nubem) of His flesh. The sun is covered by a cloud, not 

to obscure, but to temper its rays. Speaking then through the 

veil of His flesh, the Light which never fails, the Light of knowledge, 

the Light of wisdom says to men, / am the Light of the world." But 

how Christ as God is the boundless and uncreated Light, and 

as man the created "light which lighteth every man that cometh 

into the world," I have shown at length on chap. i. 4, and also 

on Is. xlv. 1, that Christ is the Sun of His Kingdom. 

Of this world. And not, like the Prophets, merely the light ot 

Israel and Judah. He tacitly here foretells the conversion of the 

Gentiles. So S. Cyril, who adds that He here alludes to the pillar 

of the cloud in the wilderness. For Christ as a brilliant light shines 

before us in the darkness and sin of the world, and guides us to 

heaven. He that followeth Me, by believing in Me as the Christ, 

and obeying My commands, walketh not in darkness, in which the 

wise men of this world walked, but liveth without error and sin, in 

the light of true faith and virtue. 

But shall have the light of life. " Now by faith, hereafter by 

sight," says S. Augustine, who adds : " These words agree with those 

of the Psalmist, ' In Thy Light shall we see light, for with Thee is 

the fount of life.' " In things of the body the light is one thing, the 

fountain another. But with God the Light and the Fount are one 

and the same. It shines for thee, that thou mayest see ; It flows for 

thee, that thou mayest drink. If thou followest this sun which thou 

seest, it leaves thee when it sets ; but if thou fallest not away from 

God, He will never set to thee. 

The light of life, therefore, according to Augustine and Bede, the 

light of glory, giving blessing to the faithful and saints which they 

themselves will obtain from Him in heaven. Others understand by 

it the light of faith, leading us to glory and very blessedness. For 

faith is a torch, guiding the faithful through the darkness of the 

world, showing them the true way of life, by which they can without 

stumbling attain to eternal blessedness. So S. Cyril, " He will 

attain to that revelation of the mysteries in Me, which will bring 

him to eternal life." But (3) the light of life can be explained as

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyGdAdAdpDIha1K6OOaT67Xj-OsesIWxITnzuP8Xkm4xdK4qb3SHaqeQH4RBRUANISwQsuNWUCKQLZ-dWmJvGZ7pETlS7Go3Ewskmvi--3OCuddcsyCuvm6n4romlQAe-JHmFFc=w615-h900-v0

d0c97537-e657-41a8-b969-0620e6a449fc

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. 301 

the quickening life, for faith, conjoined with the grace of God and 

charity, is the Divine and supernatural light, which quickens the 

soul, breathing into it the life of grace here, and the life of glory 

hereafter. 

Hence learn that the doctrine and life of Christ must be imitated 

by every man who wishes to be truly enlightened, and to be purged 

from all blindness of mind. S. Thomas a Kempis lays this down as 

an axiom in his golden book {De imitatione Christt), which contains 

as many axioms as sentences, which I study daily with much delight 

and profit. I know many who are striving after perfection, and who 

strive to conform their several actions to some one action, doctrine, or 

saying of Christ, ever looking at it as their ideal, and endeavouring 

to set it forth in all their actions. This is a pious and profitable 

means of attaining perfect holiness. For Christ was specially given 

as a mirror of sanctity. For what is more holy than the Saint of 

saints ? What brighter than the Sun, and Light Itself? what wiser 

than Wisdom Itself? 

Ver. 13. 

 

The Pharisees therefore, &c. That is, is not worthy of 

credit. For no one is accepted as a witness in his own case, but 

must produce other witnesses (see above, v. 31). 

These were not the same Pharisees as those who had accused the 

adulteress, but others, who wished to avenge the disgrace of their 

fellows, and in their malevolence against Christ, brought this charge 

against Him, to put Him to shame. " Being nurtured in ignorance," 

says S. Cyril, " and not knowing Him to be Emmanuel, they sus-

pected Him of aiming at His own glory, and attack Him, as though 

one of ourselves." 

Ver. 14.--Jesus answered, &c. Not only true in itself, but such 

as ought to be accepted and believed. This testimony of the Light 

is true, whether it show or hide Itself, says S. Augustine. The 

light itself needs no other witness. It shows itself clearly by its 

own light to be bright and shining. And thus is Christ the Light of 

the world, showing Itself to the world by Its miraculous works. 

Christ needed not any other witness, and yet He brings forward the 

highest and most indisputable witness, even God the Father,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw23F7q5OliSgv6A-Ogi26RXxebFu25-FMzEVIf6Zz2ZbuGCQ0N-M0HVJOui98uiH81X0ya3R2CrCTdkFfB4ixhgc0Sx4hEGu13xj0WIqPA00Eykv-2_mM9XgJSEnJ6wZEFIMo4=w615-h900-v0

552f69d5-b998-4d35-9ef8-e14993d1d7ed

302 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

For I know whence I came, and whither 1 go. And therefore My testimony is true, as being confirmed by the testimony of God the 

Father, says the Gloss. This I know, but ye do not, because ye 

will not know, though ye ought to know it both from My miracles 

and My words. But I know that I was sent from heaven, as the 

Messenger of the Father, being the Son of God, and Very God, 

from Very God. And when My ministry is over I shall return to 

Him again. So S. Augustine and Leontius. But He speaks 

obscurely, lest He should seem to boast, and for fear of kindling 

the more the anger of the Jews against Him. He might else have 

spoken more plainly. I am the Son of God, and therefore My testimony is true and legitimate, for the testimony of God, Who is 

the chief and irrefragable truth, is indisputable. " He wished the 

Father to be understood," says S. Augustine, "from Whom He 

departed not, when coming to us, as Ke left not us when He 

returned to heaven. But as the Sun shines on those that see and 

those that are blind, though the one sees and the other does not, 

so the wisdom of God is everywhere present, even to unbelievers, 

though they have not the eyes to behold Him," distinguishing thus 

His friends and enemies. 

Ver. 15.— Ye judge after the flesh. (1.) Ye judge of Me, not 

according to truth and equity, but from the carnal hatred ye have 

against Me ; as living according to the flesh is to live ill, so judging 

according to the flesh is to judge unjustly. (2.) From My Body, 

which ye see, ye count Me a mere man ; because I am in the flesh 

ye count Me mere flesh, judging wrongly. And thus ye rule that 

Truth can lie. For I am the Truth (S. Cyril). 

(3.) Ye judge by your senses alone, by that which ye see of Me 

 

that I am a mean, poor, abject man, not the Messiah, not God who 

hides Himself in My flesh ; and therefore ye condemn Me as a 

proud blasphemer for asserting Myself to be the Son of God. And 

this ye would not do, if ye judged of Me by reason and the spirit of 

truth. For this would declare to you that I am what I assert, 

Messiah, the Son of God. "They saw the man," says S. Augustine, 

"but did not believe Him to be God." And the Gloss, "they

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwXhlvYDlCo0JG37EwL1Re_TVLLrd1VSjROFscJPqirgFCmA1oOiaMwMZqQwkGdaAM5TPMN2nYNPom-VaNmCOlc6uDl9y9zaEE1CyW8B-_bJK6a3_BYM_ZDMkq4Ohlyqz6LFOKE0w=w615-h900-v0

32900963-7f84-4fee-bb6a-c1432cd91206

CHRIST'S JUDGMENT JUST. 303 

thought Him to be a man, who was not to be believed when 

praising Himself." " Moreover," says S. Cyril, " He acts like a phy-

sician who heeds not the insults of his patients who are mad, but 

applies to them the fitting remedies ; fighting against disease, but 

not against the patient, whom he wishes to restore to health of body 

and mind." 

Ijudge no man, not as ye do, by outward appearance, but accord-

ing to reason and the spirit. (4.) S. Chrysostom says, "Because 

the Jews might make this objection to Christ, ' If we judge wrongly 

of Thee, why dost not thou convince us ? 

' Christ replies, Ijudge no 

one. It is not My business. Were I now to judge you, I should 

assuredly condemn you. But this is not the time for doing so." 

(5.) To judge in this place, means to perform a kind of judicial act, 

and hence it means to testify, or bear witness, for witnesses force as 

it were the judge to give sentence in accordance with their testi-

mony. And hence a witness is a kind of judge (see Is. lv. 4). For 

the whole question between Christ and the Jews was with reference 

to His testimony, whether it could be lawfully accepted. And He 

maintains that it can be, as He was not alone, but the Father was 

with him (see S. Ambrose, Lib. v. Epist. 20). And this is plain 

from what Christ says, verses 17 and 18, "I am He that bear wit-

ness of Myself, and the Father that sent Me beareth witness of Me." 

But He uses the word " judge " because He seemed just before to 

have judged the adulteress, which the Pharisees resented. But He 

meant thereby that He had not judicially acquitted her, though He 

might have done so, as the Son of God. For I am not a mere 

man, as ye suppose, nor am I alone, for God the Father is with Me. 

And in this sense " Ijudge" is understood in its own proper sense, 

"I pass not a judicial sentence." 

Ver. id.—And yet if I judge (i.e., bear witness cf Myself) My 

judgment (i.e., witness) is true, i.e., fit to be taken in court, for I am 

not alone, &c. S. Chrysostom explains, " If I judge, I should justly 

condemn you, because I should not judge by Myself, but I and the 

Father together." But the true meaning is that given in verse 15. 

/ and the Father that sent Me. " For I took the form of a servant,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzTOEFPhnmgEK2ha_PsKxssJMUZMz9CEAW2t9aS28NiMW6dSRSihpP_LU-rq1NHa3vjKdSxmf2e_lMO-FWypkpLVp0KLtocNt-m_tSsB-pt0IDP-pCRg2DGAcvdDG8aaxUDMrhlCg=w615-h900-v0

e0f0b897-c5e9-4326-a37a-17371d5dcac9

3°4 S. JOHN, c. VIII. 

but lost not the form of God," says S. Augustine j " Thy Incarnation 

was Thy mission." And the Interlinear Gloss, "Though I am a 

man, yet I left not the Father ; though sent in the flesh, yet I and 

the Father are ever One by Our Godhead ; the judgment of both 

and the will of both are alike One." As He says elsewhere, " I do nothing of Myself," for I have never proceeded to any punishment, 

which was not in the mind of the Father. " For whatever thoughts 

the nature of the Father entertains, the same are completed in Me 

also, for I shine forth from His bosom, and am the true offspring of 

His substance," says S. Cyril. 

Ver. 17. 

 

It is also written in your Law (Deut. xvii. 6, xix. 5), 

that the testimony of two men is true: that is to be admitted by the 

judge, who can base on it a legal sentence, though the testimony 

may as a matter of fact be false. But a judge must go by the evi-

dence; and so his sentences may be legally right, but in reality 

wrong. If then the testimony of two men be true, how much more 

must the sentence of two Divine Persons, the Father and the Son, 

be accepted as most true, most equitable, and most just ? Christ 

applies this to His own case. For that the Father is with Him, and 

witnesses to Him, and that He is the Son of the Father, He had 

more than sufficiently proved, and therefore assumes it. "It is," says 

: Augustine, " a grand and most mysterious question when God says 

' in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be 

established 

; 

' for Susanna was accused by two false witnesses, and 

all the people witnessed falsely against Christ. But in this way is 

the Trinity represented as in mystery ; for therein is the ever-

enduring firmness of truth. If thou wishest to have a good cause, 

have three witnesses, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." 

Ver. 18.—/ am one that bear witness of Myself, &c. But thou 

wilt say, no one's testimony is accepted in his own case, and there-

fore Christ's testimony to Himself ought not to be accepted. But 

the answer is, that Christ as God witnesses to Himself as man. 

But God and man are two beings, and in Christ God was different 

from man : in nature, I mean, not in person. And from this very 

passage the Fathers gather against both Nestorians and Eutycheans,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzYlWqLYMylW62Ah4vwaNB3wxzZT73BUUvchlyCrIZihHOFQ_SvFKaP1tAnNSezdumux8C7l4Heec79rILIXlS4rGG2YKUmtj82oKihfdPl6JES9g-LvGCMEQBG-81hIZBjEGZf=w615-h900-v0

0de0a9a3-4af4-42e8-b08e-2a35478c39a5

THE FATHER'S WITNESS. 3©5 

that in Christ there was one Person, the Divine, but two natures, 

the Divine and the human. So Cyril, Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose 

(de Fide v. 2). Besides this, God the Father and God the Son 

bore witness that Jesus was the Christ by the miracles which they 

wrought both through Him and for Him (see chap. v. 31, 32). 

And especially when the Father spake in thunder out of heaven, 

This is My beloved Son. So Bede. 

Ver 19. 

 

Then said they unto Him, Where is Thy Father 2 They 

said this, in order to elicit from Him a clear statement that God 

was His Father, in order to accuse Him of blasphemy, as they did, 

chap. v. 18, xix. 7. So Chrysostom and others. 

But Cyril and Leontius less probably think that the Pharisees 

spoke contemptuously and sarcastically, as if He were the Son of 

some unknown father. S. Augustine and Bede think that they 

referred to Joseph, as being His father in the flesh. But the first 

is the best meaning. 

Jesus answered, &c. Christ did not wish to answer clearly and 

directly, " My Father is in heaven," because He knew that the 

question was put in order to ensnare Him. He therefore, though 

answering their question directly, yet spoke so guardedly that the 

Pharisees could not bring any charge against Him. As if He said, 

Ye think that I am a man, and that I have only an earthly 

father. But ye are wrong, for ye know not that I am God as 

well as man. And therefore ye understand not that I have no 

other Father than God in heaven, though I hare proved this by so 

many miracles. 

But how does this agree with what Christ said (vii. 28), Ye both, 

know Me, and know whence I am? I answer, Christ then spoke of 

Himself as man, but here He speaks of Himself as God. Origen 

adds that then Christ spoke to the people of Jerusalem who knew 

Him, but here to the Pharisees who knew Him not, and were more-

over His enemies. The word "if" is here equivalent to assuredly. 

See Leontius. As Christ says to Philip (xiv. 9), He that seeth 

Me seeth My Father also. 

S. Augustine explains it somewhat differently ; " Ye ask, who is 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwujAaCHrJz2ruQj5L6ZCEn-48ZrRq8PQttuFKbdALOFWjdNhGBaqY2oDLQIXLxCMKqHb8L87XHAmp9ITe1aOCgxGqS2ytzEXZNJMRi4f06mzy4L8oStkPztFbGedHfOiRepQ9O=w615-h900-v0

e4e27b0c-5a57-49f8-bb0f-10c8a87bfcdb

306 S. JOHN, c. VIII. 

My Father, because ye know Me not, for ye think not that I am 

God eternal in heaven." 

(2.) Cyril speaks more profoundly and to the point. " The names 

of Father and Son imply each other," Christ therefore is the gate 

(as it were) leading to the Father. " Let us learn then," he adds, 

"what He is by nature, and then we shall rightly understand as in 

an express image the Antitype Itself." For the Father is mani-

fested in the Son, as in a mirror, in the proper nature of His 

offspring. (See Wisdom vii. 26 and Heb. i. 3.) 

Origen considers that "know" means to "love." If ye loved 

Me ye would surely love My Father. For evil livers practically 

know not God, as is said of Eli's sons. 

Ver. 20. 

 

These words, &c. in the temple {i. e., the Court of 

the Temple). Rupertus thinks that the reason why no man laid hands 

on Him was because the treasury was a remote spot, frequented only 

by the Priests who wished to take money out, and the lay people 

who wished to pay it in. But it was in fact a public and much-

frequented place, being a large portico close to the court of the 

temple, and in it were preserved all the treasures of the temple. Christ 

then spake all these things openly and boldly in a place where He 

could easily have been taken. But He by His Divine power 

restrained their hands and their resolve, because the destined 

hour had not yet come. Adrichoniuus {Descript. Hieros. 103) 

describes the treasury as a chest wherein all requisites were kept foi 

the sacrifices, the support of the poor, repair of the temple, &c. When 

Heliodorus attempted to plunder it, he was said to have been 

scourged by angels, and Pilate was prevented by a popular tumult 

from applying its contents to bringing water into the city. It was 

afterwards plundered by the Romans. Here also the poor woman 

cast in her two mites. It was from this chest that the whole porch 

where it stood was called the treasury. 

The other reason why Christ spoke thus in the treasury was of 

a more hidden kind. Because it was the dark hiding-place of the 

Pharisees, where they wrought all those evil devices which Christ 

recounts, Matt. v. and xxiii. In this very spot He condemns their

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwgyqqC0VjH2yooMEc49JlMJ4dOa8mgwjnHiwUhq8NzDiJYmII7ePY-JwIwWCxB8a31myI6yMUoMg4vH_o33C7DlX8NsLOja_fe6krQE3mK8KSEB9PD457WIR_YJZqyMGlDGUe2NA=w615-h900-v0

96ab820a-ba78-4b95-8869-ab91ff214850

MYSTICAL MEANING OF TREASURY. 307 

dark deeds by saying, " I am the Light of the world," the true Light 

of wisdom and holiness, who teach men to despise earthly riches, 

as mean and perishing, and to aim at heavenly riches, as being great 

and eternal. Follow not the Pharisees who are blindly intent on these 

earthly riches, for Vespasian will speedily carry them all away 

 

but rather follow Me, the Light of the world, for I preach to you 

poverty of spirit as the way to gain boundless riches in heaven. 

And on the other hand, " Woe to you rich," &c. (Luke vi. 24). This 

then was the cause of the intense hatred they felt against Christ, 

which led them to persecute Him even to death on the cross. It 

was out of this treasury that they sacrilegiously took the thirty pieces 

of silver which they gave to Judas to betray Jesus. And therefore 

in the very same spot He willed that He would by that means be 

lifted up on the cross, and draw all men unto Him. 

Origen gives a mystical reason. " Christ," he says, " spake these 

things in the treasury, because the treasury, or rather the treasures, 

are His divine discourses, impressed with the image of the great 

King. Coins (he says) are divine words. Let every one then con-

tribute to the treasury, i.e., for the edification of the Church, what-

ever he is able for the honour of God, and the common benefit." 

And Bede, " Christ speaks in the treasury, because He spake to the 

Jews in parables which were covered and kept close. But the 

treasury then began (as it were) to be opened, when He explained 

them to His disciples, and unlocked the heavenly mysteries therein 

conceived." 

For His hour was notyet come. " Not the fated, but the opportune 

and self-chosen hour," says the Interlinear Gloss. " Some," says S. 

Augustine, " on hearing this, believe that Christ was subject to fate. 

But how can He be under fate, by whom the heaven and the stars 

were made, when Thy will, if Thou thinkest aught, transcends even 

the stars ? The hour therefore had not come, not ' the hour in which 

He should be forced to die, but in which He deigned to be slain.' 

 

Ver. 21. 

 

-Jesus therefore said to them again. (1.) Some think that 

"therefore " only indicates the beginning of a new discourse. (2.) 

Origen thinks it indicates that what follows was spoken by Christ at

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzokF9v6ZQCXkuo6GVl4U5XujDpTs0lW43mbqtmBN5ktPBJMdVs-5nyYXEPW20o4jw_4iMQ0wQJLsSjYGBBrnsh4tfy6wwh717z0L8NZ-mFhlD3ZU3omi5tQpulXz4U9FFEqWRW=w615-h900-v0

77d76755-0280-4e90-ab95-7709537897c1

308 S. JOHN, c. VIII. 

the same time and place. (3.) Maldonatus refers it to verse 19, 

Ye neither know Me nor My Father. The time therefore will come 

for you to know Me as God, but ye will not find Me, for ye will die 

in your sins. (4.) Rupertus and Toletus refer it more appositely 

to the words immediately preceding. Because He saw that the 

Pharisees understood, and were angered at His words, He adds, / 

go My way, &c. 

He had said the same before (see vii. 33), first to the officers, and 

then to the Pharisees. Igo My way, that is out of this life to My Father by My cross and death. "Death was to Christ," says S. 

Augustine, " a going forth, for He abode not in the world, but passed 

through it to heaven and immortal life." 

And ye shall seek Me, i.e., ye shall seek another Messiah, and 

will not find him, says Toletus, for there is none other but Me. 

More simply : Ye shall seek Me, to crucify Me again (see vii. 34). 

So Origen and S. Augustine, who says, " Ye shall seek Me, not from 

desire but from hatred." For after He had withdrawn from sight, 

they who hated and they who loved Him alike sought Him, the one 

to persecute, and the other from desire to hear Him. For He 

adds, And ye shall die in your sins. Your obstinate sins of 

unbelief and hatred. Ye will therefore seek Me in vain, for I shall 

ascend to heaven, ye will be thrust down to hell. Euthymius explains 

" in your sin," in consequence of your sin, for which ye will be slain 

by the Romans. But the first explanation is the plainest and most 

forcible. For Christ frequently alarms the Pharisees with the terrors 

of the last judgment. 

Whither I go ye cannot come. Ye cannot, because ye will not, 

says Origen, for every sin is a voluntary and free act. 

S. Augustine thinks that these words were spoken to the disciples, 

" Whither I go ye cannot go now," not depriving them of hope, but 

predicting its postponement. But the words which follow were 

evidently addressed to the Pharisees. 

Ver. 22. 

 

Then said the Jews, &c. The officers made a wiser 

inquiry (vii. 35), Will He go to the dispersion of the Gentiles? But 

the Pharisees, blinded by their hatred, thought He had no way of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzK71yPZ6qlhxkA58BFY7xSNmSYShOv-k2hVAV5OUMBjOcnRoYSVhM_Bk-AWbVYa82Z_JeSt0DKN7Io5VhvlEvI2BNGH6ALLv0WpktQSCFpcGq4FD0UeumQKQyVqbv7kQdvyyUjVQ=w615-h900-v0

bbf1f6f9-d595-4218-b3d1-6a9e41bf34fb

THE PHARISEES FROM BENEATH. 309 

escape but by killing Himself. Wherever He may go, we will 

follow Him up. If He goes to the Gentiles, we will drag Him back. 

He must therefore mean that He will kill Himself, so as to escape 

our hands. A presumptuous and foolish thought, suggested, how-

ever, by their malice. He might have withdrawn Himself from them 

in various ways, as He had already done. But He meant that He would go up to heaven, whither the Pharisees could not come. But 

His words, says S. Augustine, referred not to His going to death, but 

to where He was going afterwards. 

Ver. 23. 

 

And (therefore) He said unto them, &c. Ye cleave to 

your sins and will go to the lowest depth, while I shall return to 

heaven, and therefore ye will seek Me and will not find Me. For I 

am like the soaring eagle, dwelling in the loftiest mountains of 

eternity, while ye are as worms and insects creeping on the earth. 

So Rupertus and S. Augustine, who says, " Ye are from beneath 

; ye 

savour of the earth; serpent-like, ye eat the earth. But what is 

meant by eating the earth ? Ye feed on things of earth, ye delight 

in things of earth, are greedy for things of earth, ye lift not up your 

hearts above." 

S. Chrysostom and others, and S. Augustine and Bede among 

the Latins, think that the Pharisees misunderstood the words 

of Christ by reason of their earthly minds. Morally :—Ye are 

from beneath, as descended from Adam, and deriving from him your 

earthly desires, and inflamed by evil passions, thus hankering only 

after worldly things. But / am from above, because as God I am 

begotten of the Father, and as man am incarnate of the Holy Spirit. 

And therefore My feelings, My love, My desires are all heavenly. 

And to these ye cannot attain, unless ye are born again; and 

thus from earthly become heavenly and spiritual, as I said to 

Nicodemus. 

Physically :— Christ here teaches us that our birth-place, training, 

&c„, impart to each one their qualities. And just as fishes could not 

live out of water, nor birds excepting in the air, so the Pharisees, 

born in Canaan or Judaea, could not but be earthly both in body 

and mind, as Ezekiel said (xvi. 3), " Thy birth was of the land of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwkGqqj2dSUcT3w0vfuI3OWnIKcVqbn9u24duQgj1pGbmoxAJpGH6i2hLgMXgg8mAAa2jfJ8jKwifKrWPJw3_jABZ5FdDRTjWB8zhhCkymUmOWuYviRutSjdsoXTHF_jp8-2XOHFg=w615-h900-v0

1ac5db4d-f244-4043-9885-01d67f5f6a95

3 TO S. JOHN, C. VIII 

Canaan, and thy mother a Hittite." But Christ, as born and dwelling 

in heaven, was heavenly. 

Metaphysically :— K» are of your father the devil, because as he 

killed Adam by the forbidden fruit, so do ye wish to kill Me. But 

I am from above, as being the Son of the Most High God. Hear 

S. Augustine {Tract, xxxvii.) : 

" He was from above. But how was 

He from above? From the air? By no means. For there the 

birds do fly. From the heaven we see ? By no means. For there 

the sun, the moon, and stars go their rounds. From the angels ? 

Do not imagine it, for they too were made by Him, by Whom all 

things were made. How then was He from above ? From the 

Father Himself. For there is nothing above Him, who begat the 

Word equal to Himself, co-eternal with Himself, His only Begotten 

before time, by Whom He would create the times. Understand, 

therefore, this word ' from above,' as transcending in Thy concep-

tion everything that was made, the whole creation, every body, 

every created spirit, everything that is in any way subject to change." 

Ye are of this world, I am not of this world: ye are of this earth, 

or more closely to the point, ye are worldly. Ye aim at worldly 

favours, wealth, and honours. Ye live as do worldlings. Ye possess 

the very qualities of the world, says Toletus. Listen to S. Augustine 

{Tract, xxxviii.) : "Let no one say, I am not of the world; whoso-

ever thou be, O man, thou art of the world. But He who made 

the world hath come to thee, and hath freed thee from the world. 

But if the world delight thee, thou wishest for ever to be unclean 

 

but if this world no longer delight thee, thou art clean. But if 

through some infirmity the world still delights thee, let Him who 

cleanseth dwell in thee, and thou shalt be clean; but if thou art 

clean thou wilt not abide in the world, nor hear that which the 

Jews heard said, 'Ye shall die in your sins.'" 

Ver. 24. 

 

I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins. 

The sin of unbelief, and all your other sins, for there is no forgive-

ness of sin, save through faith in Christ, whom ye reject. 

For if ye believe not that I am the Saviour of the world, as I 

constantly affirm and prove also by so many miracles. So Lyra.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx5y8d6jfnFEC0FGh0Ho_UibXdrHlNoI56NxiqL3SyrPE0PpaEydGzSLXEH8soxYB5P5PGOdWPs_2GF5Fqh_NWP9tX_t2hILsdzlGMe3mY6cVxdZp1pWyLcE5IYlp5WaGmB-SmM=w615-h900-v0

ddf343a7-0591-4973-8d14-d53f2eea3120

CHRIST FROM ETERNITY. 311 

But S. Augustine, Bede, and Toletus more ingeniously : " Because 

1 am that I am , i.e., God. But Rupertus thus subtilly : " Because 

I am from above." Ye shall die in your sins, because there is no 

one but Myself, whom ye despise, who can pardon and take away sin. 

Ver. 25. 

 

They said therefore to Him, Who art Thou? Because 

they did not understand, or pretended they did not, they appositely 

ask, Who art Thou ? 

Jesus said to them, the Beginning (Vulg.), / who am speaking to 

you. S. Augustine, Bede, Rupertus, and S. Ambrose (De Fide, iii. 4), 

consider the word, the Beginning, to be in the nominative case, 

explaining it, I am the Beginning, the First and the Last, or the 

Beginning of all things, for all things were made by the Word of 

God. In the Greek the word is not aj%»), but a^v, in the 

beginning. 

S. Augustine and S. Ambrose explain it (2.) by supplying the 

word " credite," which is not in the text. We must therefore con-

sider it to be a Greek form of expression, agx»jv f°r *"'"' ^iX^"> tn ^e 

beginning. I am from the beginning, i.e., from eternity (before 

Abraham, as He said Himself, verse 58), Very God of Very God. And 

therefore I am the beginning of time, and age, and of all things. 

And yet I am speaking to you ; that is, it is I who announce this to 

you, for I assumed flesh, and was made man in order to announce 

it, and save those who believe in it. I am from the beginning, 

which very thing I solemnly declare to you. Or rather, since I am 

the Word, which the Father spake from all eternity, I having been 

made man to announce to you the same truth. For the Son is the 

Word by whom the Father speaks, and the Son is also the Word 

which speaks to us. The word " beginning," therefore, is more 

appropriate to the Son than to the Holy Spirit, for the Son is 

together with the Father the source (principium) of the Holy Spirit, 

but the Holy Spirit is not the source of any other Divine Person, 

but only of creatures ; and further, because He is the beginning 

{principium) proceeding from the beginning, that is to say, from the 

Father. And accordingly this word signifies His origin, as being 

begotten of the Father. This is clear from what is said below,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxI9lpudubalKgdnPatvC1xdXR4-6QN-4jkQhuZ4W9pjBApAvGNi_lI0yVH5umKwl9yduEITSWWJthnEI2aUT_CtkRQdDpvBvqLeierGlpF_L2EL-WpjKC7Yt-Qd4LuFb1TAQVguA=w615-h900-v0

01cd8638-157c-48ad-8fa5-5e90303b88e0

312 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

verse 27. The Vulgate does not translate it literally from the 

beginning, but the beginning, signifying thereby the Eternal Word, 

which was from the beginning, and begotten of the Father, to 

be with the Father, the beginning both of the Holy Spirit and of 

all creatures. 

From the beginning signifies two things ; first from all eternity, and 

next as begotten of God the Father. It is the same thing to say I 

am from the beginning, or I am the beginning. (See John i. 1 ; Rev. 

i. 8, iii. 14; and also Col. i. 18.) And this is what SS. Augustine, 

Ambrose, and others above mentioned consider it to mean. So says 

the Gloss, " The Father is the Beginning, but not from the begin-

ning : the Son is the Beginning, from the Beginning, that is, from 

the Father, who worketh all things by the Son, for He is the Right 

Hand, Strength, Wisdom, and Word of the Father." But the Greek 

afj£J5 means also the Chief Rule {principatus), meaning that to 

Christ belongs the dominion and rule over all things. (See Ps. ex. 

3, Vulg., and Prov. viii. 22, sec. lxx. See also S. Augustine, 

contra Max. cap. xviii., and S. Thomas, part 1, Quest, xxxvi., art. 4, 

who show that the Father and Son are not two, but the one principle 

of the Holy Spirit.) 

Morally : learn that Christ, as God and man, must be regarded as 

the beginning and the end of all our doings ; after the example of 

S. Paul and the other Apostles both in the beginning and end of 

their Epistles. S. Gregory Nazianzen begins his acrostics in this way, 

and Paulinus, "In Thee my only hopes of life depend, Thou my 

beginning, Thou my goal and end." As all numbers start from 

unity, and all lines run from the centre to the circumference, so 

should all the actions of a Christian begin and end in Christ (see 

Col. iii. 17). 

Nonnus and others explain, I am the same as I said to you at 

first; that is, that I am the Messiah, the Light and the Salvation 

of the world, but ye believe Me not. But this is a strange 

interpretation. 

Some others refer to what comes afterwards, Because ye do not 

believe Me, I have more to say to you, and to judge of you. But

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyvOapQM8O5TLpYVJieFB6waScSDmDGJOEOk5PJDY_Gsa5u1sejfUtt6NBrT4OnfzOudQJfLY1KrtMWEzTNTpL0Somff0qcK4dKNdIr_EFQQMqT14Vb1QZWr77rnXS_lkU9kKSp3A=w615-h900-v0

8c8a9bb3-a7be-4864-b00d-9623598f13c1

CHRIST THE SON OF TRUTH. 313 

this is a mere evading of the question. As if Christ said, Ye are 

unworthy of an answer, but yet deserve My condemnation. 

Ver. 26.—/ have many things, &c. I have many things to say 

against you, and to accuse you of. And in the day of judgment I 

will do so. As S. Cyril says, " I will accuse you not of one thing 

but of many, and of nothing falsely. For I can condemn you as 

unbelieving, as arrogant, as insulting, as opposers of God, as 

impudent, as ungrateful, as malignant, as lovers of pleasure rather 

than lovers of God, as courting the praise of men, and not seeking 

the glory of God." 

But He that sent Me, &c. I will omit many points and will 

merely say this, in refutation of your unbelief, that the Father who 

hath sent Me is true, and whatever therefore I say is true, and 

worthy of belief by all. " I am true " (says S. Augustine) " in judg-

ment, because I am the Son of Truth, and the Truth Itself." But 

others explain differently, (1.) Toletus : "I have many things to say 

against you. But I will not do so now, for the Father sent Me into 

the world, not to judge but to save it, and therefore, in obedience 

to Him, I say only those things which concern its salvation." (2.) 

Maldonatus, as though it were, "Because" He that hath sent Me is 

true, not "but" He that sent Me, &c. (3.) Rupertus refers it to 

what He had said before, that He was the Beginning, " These are not 

My own words, but what the Father bade Me say of Myself." (4.) 

Ye do not believe in Me as the Messiah, but this is what the Father 

wishes Me to proclaim. (5.) Ye do not believe Me now, but My Father is true. He will fulfil His own word that I shall be your 

judge, and reward you according to your deeds. But the first 

meaning is the best. Which I have heard of Him, both as God and 

as man. The Interlinear Gloss says, "To hear from Him, is the 

same as though being from Him." " The co-equal Son gives glory 

to the Father, why then dost thou set thyself against Him, being only 

His servant?" So S. Augustine. 

Ver. 27. 

 

They knew not, &c. For Jesus spake covertly and 

obscurely, for fear of exciting the hatred of the Pharisees. But 

some of the more acute of them began to suspect the true meaning

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAydUQPdL6jsNPfgBiheVGbrB5ekGIlgXeupTtzHa1uH8wH5HfmJszmjKdFx2xxRjORC_StcybxeFJSTG411LjDiRIfsEndVASR6OzRvvgvrKPsXbxV9SHB9Xl_Ob-DzbWJmkMax=w615-h900-v0

a52637e8-c827-4d93-a1f5-71726e0e7ecb

3H S. JOHN, c. VIII. 

of His words, though they did not clearly understand them, and 

could not refute Him. None of them fully knew it. And God so 

ordered it, that the Passion of Christ, and the consequent redemp-

tion of the world, might not be hindered. (See i Cor. ii. 8.) " I 

withhold the knowledge of Myself," says S. Augustine, "that My Passion may be effected " by your hands. 

Ver. 28. 

 

Then saidJesus, &c. When ye have lifted Me up on 

the Cross. He calls it His exaltation, for though it seemed to be 

His greatest degradation and disgrace, yet it was made to be, by 

God's Providence, His greatest exaltation and glory, that all nations 

should adore Christ crucified, and hope for pardon from Him. 

For this Christ won for Himself by His great humility (see Phil. ii. 

8 seq.) And thus does God deal with every follower of Christ 

who humbles himself for Christ's sake, as He says, "Every one that 

exalteth himself shall be humbled," &c. 

Then shall you know that I am Messiah, the Son of God, whom 

I declare Myself to be, and not a mere man, as ye now think Me. 

For many of the Jews, when they saw in the Cross, Death, and 

Resurrection of Jesus Christ, such patience, charity, zeal, and such 

great prodigies and miracles, were moved with compunction to 

believe in Him. Christ had obtained all this by His Cross, and 

obtained it from His Father (see Acts ii. 41). As S. Augustine says, 

" He saw that many would believe after His Passion. And this He 

says that no one who is conscious of guilt should despair, when 

even His own murder was condoned." See S. Cyril, and others. 

I do nothing of Myself, &c. Christ frequently inculcates the same 

truth, both in order to speak humbly of Himself, and to gain 

authority for His doctrine from God the Father. " But the Father," 

says S. Augustine, " did not so teach the Son, as though He were 

ignorant when He begat Him; but His teaching Him, was His 

begetting Him full of knowledge." For with the Son His being is 

His knowledge. And therefore the Father by begetting gave Him 

both existence and knowledge. 

Ver. 29—And He that sent Me is with Me. He adds this (says 

S. Chrysostom) lest He should be accounted inferior to the Father

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzB90OjMjZ6BQ0rOSs2XfXZG_4P98Uuj2bL9ZYUwUaCHQhk49d95kl_QCRHr1mlZcvig2K6AuTqgA3paJ06l2bj6aozAPjdJw6CwVPJKG2k-vZFXuATXOMegFELQnTri9TS06CfAQ=w615-h900-v0

be921fcb-7714-430f-b1e8-902339282e3a

MANY BELIEVE. 3 I 5 

who taught Him. The one relates to the Incarnation (dispensationem), 

the other to the Godhead. " The Father," says S. Augustine, "sent 

the Son, but did not leave Him." Moreover, the Father is ever 

with the Son, not only by the inseparable essence of Deity, which 

continues ever in number the same, but also by the special provi-

dence and guidance vouchsafed to the manhood which He assumed, 

the Godhead guiding and directing it in every work, to make all His 

work perfect and divine. 

Ver. 30. 

 

As He spake these words many, &c. ; i.e., many of the 

simple-minded, candid and teachable people, but few or none of 

the proud Pharisees. And they believed, not only as convinced by 

the force of His arguments, but charmed by the grace and power of 

His words. "Never man spake like this man." 

Ver. 31. Then said Jesus, &c. He wished to confirm them in 

the faith they had accepted. If ye are so faithful and constant as 

to follow Me through persecutions and crosses, even to heaven itself, 

ye will be worthy not only of the name and title of My disciples, 

but also of their deserts and reward. 

Ver. 32. Andye shall know the truth, &c. The Greek Fathers 

understand by the Truth, Christ Himself; meaning ye shall know 

Me to be the Truth, shadowed forth by the figures of the old Law, 

from which I will set you free, that ye may serve God not with 

bodily ceremonies, but in the Spirit and truth of faith, hope, and 

charity (see above, iv. 23). 

(2.) Hence, in accordance with the mind of Christ, If ye abide in 

My doctrine, ye shall taste by experience how sweet it is, and it will 

free you from the yoke of sin (see below, verse 34). For faith in 

Me will lead you to penitence, contrition, and charity, which does 

away with all sin. " If the Truth pleaseth thee not, let liberty please 

thee." He clearly restored liberty, and took away iniquity. 

Analogically : My doctrine will deliver you from the corruption 

of this place of mortality, change, and exile, because it will bring you 

to the liberty of a blessed immortality, and the glory of the children 

of God. Thus S. Augustine on this passage : " What doth He 

promise to those who believe? Ye shall know the truth. But did

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAytHoH-2TBPRShtPmWhjh9EaMlHAwjGttfC8ZibrNKOL8dPFts24n4t2TMPfERxKRP-tYAv2ayTulOXZ92uA3xNgQkvK5wsQikfHBksHSmDJNdvOyk73f5L8Sdw67w8rBVO0tRD=w615-h900-v0

cc4a3b73-050f-4a18-9f1a-f37e5fcc1f19

3 r 6 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

they not know it, when the Lord spake? for if they knew it not, 

how did they believe ? They believed, not because they knew, but 

that they might know : for what is faith but believing that we see 

not? But the truth is, to see that which thou hast believed." There 

is a fourfold bondage which Christ did away with, and a fourfold 

liberty which He bestowed, (i.) The bondage of the Law which 

Christ did away with by the liberty of the Gospel. (2.) Bondage 

under sin, which He took away by the liberty of righteousness. 

(3.) Bondage under the dominion of concupiscence, which He took 

away by the liberty of the Spirit, and the dominion of charity and 

grace. (4.) Bondage under death and mortality, which He will take 

away by the liberty and glory of the resurrection. It does not refer 

to the liberty of the will, as though sinners were so entirely the 

slaves of sin as not to have any free-will, and that Christ gives it 

them back when He justifies them. For a sinner sins by free-will, 

and a penitent repents and is justified only by his free-will, aided 

by the grace of God. 

Calvin foolishly denies free-will both to sinners and to the 

righteous. " Let us who are conscious of our own bondage glory 

only in Christ our deliverer." For he thinks that we are not 

intrinsically free, just as we are not intrinsically just by inherent 

righteousness, but only by the imputation of Christ's righteousness. 

Each of which opinions is not only an impious, but also a foolish 

heresy. 

Ver. 33. 

 

They answered Him, &c. Christ in what He had said 

indirectly charged the Jews with ignorance and bondage. But as 

glorying in their descent from Abraham, they felt wounded ; and 

putting aside the charge of ignorance, they proudly deny the charge of 

bondage, and say that they had no need of the liberty of Christ. We 

are slaves neither by birth, nor by condition. " And in like manner," 

says S. Chrysostom, " men when charged with impurity and wicked-

ness put it aside, but when their family and work are impugned, 

they start up, as if they were mad." But the Jews did not understand 

Christ, for He spake not of civil, but of spiritual bondage, and that 

He would set them free from the bondage of sin by the liberty

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxlfjX2DJ4ImjXE4qtM0CgyGBv2DlyIQ-ZJiWBC3_s53a6mB-2xxNQH4JB1-UdJgOMFSr7OaPLaOp4Xf94vSEtGTsNGQGc3DYLqanvmb8ibQLr47pdw1Dcyah62UO-covKeFh4L3w=w615-h900-v0

faed5bc5-dd52-4743-8773-0d457d1f2786

THE BONDAGE OF SIN. 317 

of grace. But did the Jews say truly that they were never in 

bondage to any man ? S. Chrysostom and others say that they spoke 

too boastfully, but that they veiled their falsehood, because though 

often conquered they had never been sold as slaves. 

(2.) Cajetan, Toletus, Jansen, and others reply to the charge by 

saying that though the Jews had formerly been in bondage, yet that 

the present generation of Jews had never been so, for they were 

merely the subjects, not the slaves, of the Romans. And this seems 

to be the most satisfactory meaning ; for to say that their fathers 

had never been in bondage would have been a falsehood at which 

the sun itself would have blushed, and Christ would have at once 

confuted it. All they meant to say was that their race was a free 

and noble one, and that their subjection to the Romans was not 

slavery. 

Ver. 34.— Verily, verily, &c. Most assured, i.e., the saying is, and 

specially commended to their notice. But our Lord speaks to them 

modestly and becomingly, using only general terms and the third 

person. He might have said, Ye commit many sins, and are there-

fore the servants of sin, and from this bondage no one but Myself 

can deliver you. " A miserable bondage," exclaims S. Augustine in 

loc, and adds the reason. "A man slave, when worn out by his 

master's cruel treatment, can at length escape and be at rest. But 

whither can the servant of sin flee ? He carries with him himself, 

whithersoever he flies. A wicked conscience cannot fly from itself; 

it has no place to go to, it follows itself. It cannot withdraw from 

itself; for the sin which causes it is within." (2.) S. Peter (11. ii. 

19) gives a further reason. "Of whom a man is overcome, of the 

same is he brought in bondage." (3.) He who committeth sin is 

the servant of the devil, who instigates to sin, and he is a cruel 

tyrant, who drives on sinners, as though they were his slaves, ever 

drawing them on from one sin to another, and in the end to hell. 

(4.) Every sin leaves behind it a desire and inclination to repeat the 

sin, and this concupiscence remains, even after the sin has been 

given up, for our punishment and temptation. Whence the Apostle 

says that he was sold under sin, that he did what he would not (as

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAywC8RtQunGpqkgxqmSLXUdOsOufSqsWwsebvIZvsomVBkk2B6Ql7TvYt6bMC9d22gnBQ-9JChdkxPnHXLL0fhkQvtitsuiF4JwsLTgdWIrRGUQtGbrRRuXYz5RsYEMp7RqEjNr=w615-h900-v0

cb191356-82c4-466d-bc0c-3412b09b535b

3*8 S. JOHN, C VIII. 

feeling against his will the motives of concupiscence), and that he 

cannot do the things he would. (5.) Because the sinner is bound 

by the chains of the sin he has committed, so that he cannot free 

himself, unless Christ sets him free by His grace, according to the 

saying (Prov. v. 22), "His own iniquities take the wicked himself, 

and he is bound with the cords of his sins." In these passages, to 

sin, which is inanimate, is ascribed the character of a master, or 

tyrant, to signify (1.) the tyrannical power of sin and concupiscence, 

and (2.) because by sin is understood the devil, who holds sway in 

the realm of sin, and holds stern dominion over sinners. 

St. Ambrose, on the words of Psalm cxix. 94, "I am thine, O save me," says strikingly, " the worldling cannot say to Him, I am 

Thine, for he has many masters. Lust comes, and says, Thou art 

mine, for thou desirest the things of the body. Avarice comes, and 

says, Thou art mine, for the silver and gold thou hast is the price of 

thy bondage. Luxury comes and says, Thou art mine, for one day's 

feasting is the price of thy life. Ambition comes, and says, Thou art 

clearly mine, for knowest thou not that I have set thee over others 

that thou mightest serve me ? knowest thou not that I have con-

ferred power on thee, in order to subject thee to mine own power? 

All the vices come, and say severally, Thou art mine. What a vile 

bond-slave is he whom so many compete for? And moreover the 

sinner who cannot say to God, / am Thine, hears from the devil, 

Thou art mine" For as S. Ambrose adds, " Satan came and entered 

,nto him, and began to say, he (Judas) is not thine, O Jesus, but 

mine. He thinks those things that are mine, he ponders my 

thoughts in his heart ; he feasts with Thee, and feeds with me ; he 

receives bread from Thee, and money from me ; he drinks with me, 

and sells me Thy Blood ; he is Thy Apostle, but my hireling." 

Ver. 35. 

 

The servant abideth not, &c. He who is the servant of 

sin, like you Jews, has not the right of remaining in his Master's 

house (that is the Church of God) for ever : for after death he will be 

cast into the outer darkness of hell, as ye too will be cast out. 

But the Son abideth for ever in His Father's house, that is, I ever 

abide with My Father in heaven. But if through Me and My grace

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwVjSMgWrCi0LiL6_utV0gUOwCm7QagTzlwuMmgEliuYKGVog4E_SfOuhtd3Uf_aeYQhw5rR9QjpLshYjheCqv5CKYpKdQoQhLjxNnoKvwsDVyfFhRCO3pR7gpdUktufukrkPOkmg=w615-h900-v0

cbe7f6d1-547b-4b1d-8954-67322fe473b6

THE TRUE SONS OF ABRAHAM. 319 

ye have been delivered from the bondage of sin, ye will abide for 

ever with Me, as adopted children, in the house of God, that is in 

the Church militant by grace, and in the Church triumphant, for 

ever happy and glorious in heaven. So S. Augustine, Bede, and 

others. 

Ver. 36. 

 

If therefore the Son, &c. I alone can make you free, 

not Abraham or Moses, though most beloved servants of God. So 

S. Chrysostom and others. 

Ver. 37. J know, &c. By nature ye are Abraham's children, but 

in your deeds ye are degenerate. Your descent from Abraham 

will not therefore profit you. It will increase your damnation, for 

he will say at the last day, I acknowledge you not as my children, 

for ye have crucified Christ, my son and your brother. 

Because My word, &c. Because ye will not take it in. Origen 

and S. Chrysostom think that these words were said to those who had 

before feebly believed in Christ, but who, on hearing themselves 

called "servants," were incensed against Him and wished to kill 

Him. But it is more probable that they were addressed to 

unbelievers who had before that plotted His death. 

Ver. 38. I speak, &c. Ye not only speak, but do that which ye 

have learnt from your father, the devil, especially in seeking to kill 

Me, implying that Abraham was not their father. See this more 

clearly declared verse 44. 

Ver. 39. They answered, &c. Because Christ seemed to imply 

that they had another father, they wished to learn from Him who 

he was. We own Abraham, and none other as our father. 

Jesus saith unto them, If ye are the children of Abraham, do the 

works of Abraham. It is so in the Vulgate. But some Greek 

MSS. read as in the English version. He does not deny their 

extraction, but condemns their doings. Says S. Augustine, " Your 

flesh may be from Abraham, but not so your life." 

Ver. 40. But now ye seek, &c. Abraham did not injure any one, 

but saved Lot, and as many as he could. But the Jews were eager 

to kill Christ. The Jews (Perke. Avoth. cap. v.) draw the same 

contrast between a disciple of Abraham and of Balaam.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwhibUZvzseWoyN43bmXc_Pptk7qCpaJdcaXOL43V_l6zyBNA08Xcwj0gyU0hfZPbiE2bWV3MhLoTyuuvjrQUCBCWzB8iJew5kSXO96MoWsB57mlY_BDqZqIsbZ0E64uS7i6H7T=w615-h900-v0

5a8887f1-a8fb-41ed-ac38-6a8b934cceaa

320 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

Ver. 41.— Ye do the works of your father. He persists in saying 

that they were not Abraham's children, but does not say whose 

children they were. 

Then said they unto Him, We be not born of fornication, &c. 

Origen, Cyril, and Leontius think that in these words they implicitly 

reproached Him with His own birth. An atrocious statement, 

which the Pharisees studiously propagated, to detract from our 

Lord's credit and authority. But it would have been atrocious 

blasphemy. (2.) Euthymius and Rupertus suppose it to be only an 

assertion of their descent from Sarah, and not from Hagar, and thus 

not spurious, or in a secondary rank. (3.) We are not born of 

spiritual fornication, i.e., idolatry. We are not Hagarenes, who 

were idolaters. Rupertus objects that to make out this meaning 

the word " but " should have been inserted. But Maldonatus main-

tains that such particles are often omitted, adding that fornication 

in the prophets means idolatry, as being spiritual fornication, draw-

ing away the soul from its true Spouse (see Hos. i. 2). Theopbylact 

explains it to mean, " We are not born of mixed marriages of Jews 

and Gentiles, which were forbidden, and counted illegitimate by the 

Jews." (4.) The Jews reply in a straightforward manner, Abraham 

is our true earthly father; and one is our Father, even God in 

heaven. Your charge is therefore false. You unjustly claim the 

God of Abraham for thyself alone, and exclude us from sonship with 

Him, and hand us over to another father, the devil, making us 

spurious, and consequently infamous. 

Ver. 42. 

 

Jesus said, &c. Put syllogistically, our Lord's argument 

runs this, " He who loves God, loves also the Son of God. But 

ye do not love Me, who am the Son of God. Therefore ye love 

not God. Just as the Arians, who by denying Christ to be the Son 

of God, deny the Father also ; for if He has not a Son, He cannot 

be called God the Father. 

For I proceeded forth (l|5$X0ov) and came (#*w), T am here. S. 

Augustine, S. Hilary (de Trin. vi.), consider that the twofold generation 

of our Lord is here set forth. I came forth by eternal generation. 

I am come into the world by My Incarnation. " That the Word

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw_b73-3CanspwBrZxfbsi5XuFnxk5wWIgUgW4mexZq3sC0RiCRbmozRSUvvTwMEiArBZEH3vLBnTMU63C7mgc590Rxsn8h2GFifeIVzRehh0oA6cMFvgGOf8jZ4ZW6wVQat2Dn=w615-h900-v0

c4602e2b-0d34-4114-a35b-32b9f3dbfcc1

A WARNING TO HERETICS. 32 

 

proceeded forth from God, is His eternal procession" (says S. 

Augustine), but He came to us, because He was made flesh ; His 

advent was His being made man. 

But Jansen, Maldonatus, and others refer both the expressions 

to the Incarnation, but yet as implying and presupposing His 

eternal generation. "I came forth from God, and came into the 

world, though I had before come forth from God, and was in heaven 

as God" (see chap. xvi. 27). 

For I came not of Myself, but He sent Me. He teaches that He 

was not self-originate, says S. Hilary (de Trin. vi.) Origen adds, He 

says this on account of some who came of themselves, and were not 

sent of the Father (see Jer. xxxiii. 21). A warning to such as 

Lutherans, Calvinists, and others, who have no true mission. 

Ver. 43.— Why doye not understand, &c. Because cleaving to your 

pride, avarice, hatred, and enmity against Me, ye will not hear 

Me and understand. " They could not hear," says S. Augustine, 

" because they refused to be corrected by what they heard ; 

" but 

(as says the Gloss) ye are of the devil, and have elected to go on 

with him. S. Gregory Nazianzen (Oral, iv., de Theol.) tells us that in 

Scripture " I cannot " sometimes means " I will not." (See Matt. 

xix. 1 2.) But secondly, and more properly and forcibly, " Ye do not 

understand My words because ye cannot endure My teaching, and 

will not let My words enter your ears, so hateful am I to you, and 

so obstinately have you from hatred hardened your hearts against 

Me." Thus Emmanuel Sa. 

Ver. 44.— Ye are of your father the devil. "Not by descent but 

by imitation," says S. Augustine, quoting Ezek. xvi. 4 ; and adding, 

"The Jews, by imitating their impieties, found for themselves 

parents, not of whom to be born, but with whom they would be lost, 

by following their evil ways." 

S. Epiphanius {Her. 38, 40) by the devil in this place understands 

Judas Iscariot, whom our Lord also calls a devil. But the author 

of " Questions on the Old and New Testament " (apudS. Augustine) 

understands Cain. But it is certain that it must be taken literally 

to mean Lucifer. For the Jews in persecuting Jesus followed him 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyWyE7pMemHhHJy1ysSCH5vSj47FTd4Uu-hCJX-NIY3nXHYo_LYWXofzrPg4Ut9qjf3-Dr0D7LHGVQomCvgCyyof5UuAb9Tx4WQQrQ-cSAf8dNno521nEWf0O0eCEjHxHV4n3okxw=w615-h900-v0

a7bcb09d-1da9-4cc0-81a6-ca33c521e4cb

3 22 S. JOHN, c. VIII. 

as their father ; " not by succession in the flesh, but in sin," says S. 

Ambrose {Lib. iv. in loc.) 

Ye are of, &c. " In order to kill Me." He explains that they are 

of the devil, by following his suggestion. S. Chrysostom says he 

speaks not of " works," but of desires (or lusts), showing that both 

he and they greatly delighted in murders. For the devil has an 

ardent desire to destroy all men, both because he grudges them the 

glory from which he himself fell, but also to injure God, whom he 

hates as his torturer, and wishes to tear away men from Him whom 

He created in His own image, and called and predestinated to His 

own eternal grace and glory. 

He was a murderer, &c. For as soon as Adam was created, 

Lucifer, the very same day through envy destroyed both him and 

all his posterity, by persuading him to eat of the forbidden fruit. 

And in like manner does he endeavour through you, Jews, to 

kill Me, by Whom all men are to be redeemed from death. 

For he ever persists in his eager desire to destroy men, as the 

leopard and wolf, which feed on human flesh. He urged on 

Cain to kill Abel, and Joseph's brethren to destine him to death. 

And even now instigates all murderers to commit their murders. 

And much more does he thirst for the death and destruction of 

souls, though bodily death is here more properly meant, for this it 

was they plotted against Christ. Euthymius and S. Augustine {Contra 

Petib. ii. 13). 

And abode not in the truth, i.e., in the integrity and perfection, the 

grace, righteousness, and sanctity in which he was created. True 

means pure and unadulterated. As Nathaniel is called "a true 

Israelite, in whom is no guile." Again "in truth" means in that 

which was his duty. In S. John, David, and Solomon " the truth 

" 

commonly means this (see John iii. 21). There is a threefold truth, 

in heart, word, and deed. The truth of the heart is opposed to error; 

the truth of word is opposed to a lie, the truth of deed is when a 

man acts in accordance with what is practically right, and this is 

opposed to iniquity and sin. Now the devil did not stand in the 

truth because he did not persevere in what he ought to have done.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyx_ybTpniJjC2cGUxJJV9LbUiXnFmc_u1XwJ9DltK3w6LYARs_ukw6q20vLSUyjDVj1XNpvngmYesMYyHOTqRdlg1tQCgy1EQ2fLb0FuqNekAVVve2vDsTqFy4e5Gg7SZOYcdlaA=w615-h900-v0

b3cf5c38-5353-4fa4-9ca4-1a5b18491754

THE FATHER OF LIES. 323 

He refused to be under God. He claimed to be His equal, a kind 

of second god, and rose up against Him through pride. Hence 

he fell from his state of grace, and was cast down to hell (see Is. xiv. 

12). And so S. Chrysostom {Horn. liv. ; S. Leo, Ser. de Quadr., 

and others). Hence (1.) S. Augustine (contr. Adimantum iv. 4), 

understands by the " truth," the law, meaning that the devil did 

not abide in the Law of God. Others by "truth " understand fidelity, 

or the obedience due to God as the Creator. 

(2.) S. Irenseus (v. 22, 23) understands it to mean "veracity," as 

our Lord says below he is " a liar, and the father of it." Christ seems 

to charge the Jews with two faults, which they had learned from the 

devil, murder, and mendacity, and calumny. 

(3.) Origen (Tom. xxiv.) understands it to mean " truth in practical 

matters," which Lucifer abandoned when he sinned by pride, which 

practically was a false step. This resulted from his not abiding in 

truth of act, and thus he departed from truth in heart and word, 

and thus by his lies deceived mankind. 

Hence S. Augustine {de Civ. xi. 13) rightly infers that he was 

created in grace and righteousness, and that the Manichees were wrong 

in asserting that he was naturally wicked or created by an evil god. 

They inferred this wrongly from 1 John iii., "The devil sinnethfrom 

the beginning." The true meaning of this passage is explained 

in loco. 

Because there is no truth in him. Neither in thought, word, or 

deed, for those three kinds of truth have a sisterly relation to each 

other. But here " truth " rather signifies veracity. 

When he speaketh a lie, &c. When he fell from his original beauty 

as an angel and became a hideous demon, it was innate in him to 

deceive ; his special and proper business was to lie, and to this he 

entirely devotes himself. 

(2.) " Of his own," means of his own special invention. But men 

lie from imitating him, and by his suggestion. 

(3.) " Of his own," from his own inward delight in it. He delights 

in it, as a thief in his thefts. 

For he is a liar. From his constant habit of lying, he is altogether

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzgPpL9QsthyC11nBzEvmQ-wmlDVt6Q9M4Hl7865SRpa-MYxc79Tq93NKVq3TC11DNiLVm92MwMChxuP8aXV3rmfameJ_jz772HVo5SCbme67sUrcnP7v-FMcEXPJbtnEs17-UDag=w615-h900-v0

9b7d3602-ffee-48f6-afac-9468b37b737e

3 24 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

made up of lies. And if he ever speaks truth, it is by compulsion, 

or else by means of truth to persuade men to what is false. 

And thefather of it. "His father," says Nonnus. The Cainian 

heretics understood the devil to mean Cain. But the Manicheans 

on S. Augustine's authority (in loco) said that the devil had a father, 

even the evil god, and that both he and his son were liars. But 

I maintain that " of it " refers to the word " lie," which is understood 

in the term liar which occurs just before. And he is the father of 

a lie. (i.) Because he first invented the act of lying. (2.) Because 

he fashions and forms lies, as the potter moulds the clay. So 

S. Augustine and others. It is a Hebraism. Origen says, " The 

devil begot a lie. He was seduced by himself, and in this respect 

was worse, because others are deceived by him, whereas he is the 

author of his own deception." And S. Augustine, " Not every one 

that lies is a father of a lie, but he only who, like the devil, received 

it not from any other quarter." 

And hence the devil is the father and author of heresies, and 

therefore heresiarchs have had a devil at their side who suggested 

their heresies, as well as arguments to uphold them. So Luther con-

fessed of himself. Such a suggester had Arius, Eunomius, Calvin, 

&c. The Apostle (1 Tim. iv. 1) speaks of heresies as "doctrines 

of devils " (see notes in loco). 

45. But if I speak the truth, ye believe Me not. His argument 

stands thus, " Whosoever believeth a lie is a son of the devil. And ye 

believe a lie, and are therefore sons of the devil." But "if" may 

mean "because," as some Greek and Latin copies read. And so it 

would mean, " Because I speak the truth in truly reproving your 

sins, and truly asserting myself to be the Messiah, and prove this 

by miracles, yet ye will not believe Me because ye will not give up 

your sins, and will not believe what I say and teach, but rather 

believe the devil who persuades you that I am a false prophet, and 

my miracles are mere sleight of hand. 

Ver. 46.— Which of you, &c. This is to anticipate an objection 

of the Jews. For they might say, " We do not believe thee, because 

thou art a violater of our law, in healing the sick on the Sabbath-day."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzdvaFk5G-sZvqVdStDDv-UHLtX51oI5gsr65mqKiuQo2AHaVwM81xpgWQcGqeg8ebkvDYy44iG_KhH19s0X_q3c49GlhcbmsMIHloQyi1Iofl3JnSazhH3HU68z6om1e75cX2lMg=w615-h900-v0

e154f119-b85d-4060-9bbd-652c4129f26f

SINLESSNESS OF CHRIST. 325 

Produce any other charge against Me, and I will submit to your dis-

believing Me. My healing on the Sabbath was not a violation, but a 

sanctification of the Sabbath. I leave any further charge to be decided 

by you who are my sworn enemies. So confident was Christ in His 

innocence that no one could lay anything to His charge which bore 

the slightest resemblance to sin. For He was Himself sinless, both 

on account of the Beatific Vision which He enjoyed, as the Blessed 

in heaven are incapable of sin for the same reason (for seeing God 

to be the Supreme Good, they necessarily love Him with all their 

strength, and hate whatever displeases Him) and likewise from the 

hypostatical union with the Word. For because His humanity 

existed in the Person of the Word, the Word kept His humanity free 

from all sin, and in perfect holiness. For if the humanity of Christ 

had sinned, the Person of the Word would have sinned ; which is 

impossible. For virtuous or vicious actions relate to persons, and 

are attributed to them. Hence S. Ambrose (on Ps. xl. 13) brings 

in God the Father thus addressing Christ, " Thou wert conversant 

with sinners, Thou didst take on Thee the sins of all, Thou wast made 

sin for all, but yet no practice of sin could reach Thee. Thou 

didst dwell among men, as if among angel?, Thou madest earth to 

be like heaven, that even there also Thou mightest take away 

sin." 

JfI say the truth, &c. He here shuts out another objection of 

the Jews. For they could have said, We believe Thee not, not for 

any sin which Thou hast committed, but because the things Thou 

sayest and teachest are not true." Christ meets the objection by 

saying, " I have proved to you My doctrine by so many arguments 

and miracles, that no prudent person who is not blinded by hatred 

could question its perfect truth. If then My life is most innocent, 

and My doctrine most true, why do ye not believe Me ? " Receive 

then the truth not as a bare assertion, but as demonstrated by 

reason. 

Ver. 47. 

 

He that is of God, &c. He here assigns the true reason 

for the unbelief of the Jews, because they were born not of God, 

but of the devil ; that is, ye do not listen to the spirit and instinct of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwTDD1HhR95QujggokunwJYlDEohAOREsAr4GFARlj7IzcIrZcVl03h38E6qR7KkW38zpEMza2HLocLcKEi05dnD0b6f7JPSfy3dqSQYpUMfjEWnbNfUGvgP_UqwArJoy6tr7mR-w=w615-h900-v0

6e2430e1-f3c8-4584-ac95-461c686f25a0

3 26 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

God, but of the devil. For the devil has blinded your hearts with 

covetousness, hatred, and envy of Me. And ye therefore listen not 

to the words of God which I, who am sent from Him, announce to 

you, because ye will not hear and understand them. Because then 

ye are not the children of God who is true, but of the devil who is a 

liar, ye listen to his lying suggestions, but will not give a hearing to 

the true words of God which are uttered by Me. 

Moreover S. Augustine and S. Gregory {Horn, xviii.) understand 

these words of the elect and reprobate. He who is predestinated 

and elected hears the words of God, ye hear them not because ye 

are reprobate. But this is not the literal and genuine sense of the 

word, but merely an adapted one. For as Toletus and Maldonatus 

observe, many of those who at that time did not believe in Christ 

afterwards believed at the preaching of S. Peter and the Apostles 

 

and on the other hand, some who then believed in Christ afterwards 

fell away from the faith, and became reprobates (see John vi. 67). 

Lastly, the Manichees inferred wrongly from the passage (as S. 

Augustine asserts) that some men are good by their own nature, as 

created by the good God, but others are naturally evil, as created by 

the evil principle. 

Morally :—S. Gregory infers thus from this saying of Christ : " Let 

each one ask himself if he takes in the word of God with the ear of 

his heart, and he will understand whence it is. The truth bids us 

long for the heavenly country, to crush the desires of the flesh, to 

shun the glory of the world, not to covet others' goods, to be liberal 

with one's own. Let each one of you consider with himself if this 

voice of God has prevailed in the ear of his heart, and he will 

acknowledge that it is from God." And just below, "There are 

some who willingly listen to the words of God so as to be moved by 

compunction even to tears, but who after their tears go back again 

to their sin. And these assuredly hear not the words of God, 

because they scorn to carry them out in deed." Hence S. Gregory 

infers that it is a mark of divine predestination if a man obeys the 

holy inspirations of God, and of reprobation if he rejects them (see 

Prov. i. 24). And John x- 27, " My sheep hear My voice." They

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyNZhqfaXUtAT3AKCMCiQ0LK3-pXT1ppZlCaTT8Z04gDSli_40ufdPgTvD-ptV_8vAKiaaOdXWeIR2_Chfw7uoJobMo_2obEMPWCFWnu1jvSt4aJ5v8fAMt46_i-NSZA9HpMB6QLg=w615-h900-v0

f9499f8e-b0a2-4cf6-a3aa-8e6cb4fa5407

CHRIST REPROACHED. 327 

who hear the voice of Christ their Shepherd are saved, they who 

hear not are devoured by the devil. So too Christ says plainly, 

" Blessed are they who hear the word of God and keep it " (Luke 

xi. 25). And S. Bernard (Serm. 1, in Septuag.) tells his monks 

that the greatest proof of predestination is the profitable hearing 

of the word of God. For it was their constant food, by reading 

and meditation and prayer, to examine whatever proceeds from 

the mouth of God, and to fulfil it in their lives. 

Ver. 48.— TheJews answered and said, &c. They used to say it, 

though it is written nowhere else. But why did they call Him a 

Samaritan ? (1.) Because He associated with the Samaritans. (2.) 

Because He came from Galilee, which was near Samaria. (3.) 

Because the Samaritans were partly Jews and partly Gentiles, and 

Christ seemed to them to be the same, as bringing in a new faith 

and religion ; and He thus seemed to be mixing up the traditions of 

the elders with the Gospel. (4.) And lastly, because He seemed to 

be making a schism, like the Samaritans. A Samaritan was, more-

over, a term of reproach. 

And hast a devil. (1.) Because they said He cast out devils through 

Beelzebub, the chief of the devils. (2.) Because He made Himself 

God, transferring to Himself the glory due to God, as Lucifer strove to 

do. So Leontius. Our Lord so understood it, and answered, " I 

seek not My own glory." (3.) Thou art mad, like lunatics, and 

those possessed with devils (see x. 20, and vii. 20). This was an 

atrocious blasphemy. How wondrous, then, the patience of Christ 

 

For He answered, 

Ver. 49. 

 

I have not a devil, &c. As loving truth He denies the 

false charge, but though all-powerful He returns not their reproach. 

" God, though receiving an injury, replies not with words of con-

tumely ; and thou, when insulted by thy neighbours, shouldest abstain 

from their evil words, lest the exercise of just reproof should be 

turned into weapons of anger." And Chrysostom, "When it was 

necessary to teach, and to inveigh against their pride, He was 

severe. But in bearing with those who reproached Him, He 

exercised great gentleness, to teach us to resent any wrongs done to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyD77NF8lebPOTuIqaXQhNKvSX1Vf5P4DiY5i7RFg6mbbPb1CvumGf2zxoyvavrIe7vwpyfLkeUR6PJQoQYXSKXsd7EBD3VUHI7Z6EZhF_D7jzZCGhfY9qYVzr27XyxKYBbKmII=w615-h900-v0

c709ee41-1008-457a-9f4d-c257ebedf2b8

3 28 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

God, to overlook the wrongs done to ourselves." And S. Augustine, 

" Let us imitate His patience, that we may attain to His powers." 

Christ took no notice of the term Samaritan, because it was a 

reproach directed only against Himself, and not against God. He refused therefore to avenge His own wrongs, but would defend the 

honour of God. All knew He was a Galilean, and not a Samaritan, 

and by saying that He had not a devil, He refuted at the same time 

the charge of being a Samaritan. For the Samaritans, as schismatics, 

were the bond slaves of the devil. S. Gregory {Horn, xviii.) gives 

a mystical reason for His silence. " A Samaritan," he says, "means a 

guardian, and He is truly our guardian, of whom the Psalmist 

speaks, 'Except the Lord keep the city, they watch in vain who 

guard it ' (Ps. cxxvii. 2) ; to whom moreover it is said by Isaiah, 

' Watchman, what of the night? ' He would not therefore say, ' I am 

not a Samaritan,' lest he should deny also that He was our guardian." 

I have not a devil. But ye have one. So far from detracting from 

the glory of God, or claiming it for Myself, as Lucifer did, I con-

tinually honour the Father and say that I derive everything from 

Him, that I am sent from Him, that I obey Him in all things, that 

I refer everything I have to Him, and direct everything to His 

honour and glory. But ye rather dishonour God the Father, 

because ye dishonour Me, and assail Me with most bitter reproaches, 

though I am His Son, and His ambassador in the world. So 

Leontius. Others explain it more generally of sin—I honour My 

Father by good works, ye dishonour Him by your sins. So S. 

Augustine. 

Ver. 50.—/ seek not, &c. It is God the Father who will most 

sharply punish those who seek not My glory, but in every way 

dishonour and discredit Me. S. Chrysostom. 

It may be said, " This is contrary to what Christ says (v. 22), 

The Father judgeth no matt." But there Christ speaks of the public 

and general judgment, here He speaks of the private and daily 

judgment with which He avenges the wrongs done to His Son and 

His saints, as by the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus for the death 

of Christ ; as He here seems to hint. So Maldonatus and others.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxHTW8W5XUI9Wrp_D11X-Vly_cq8lnBOJ4ESVXPQa0ELsiS8QOM0vvSLAHD56PElCLeOxPp8umoPJ8CTvPJdHlShTriKETQdY7Q4c6sSS9uwRYAv4DQVv8xz-kWJoDgP0z72zhVHQ=w615-h900-v0

a7eaf29f-9d7e-46b9-8414-5ba12817000e

CHRIST KIND TO THE EVIL. 329 

But the Gloss says, " There is one that judgeth who distinguishes 

My glory from yours ; as David says, ' Judge Me, O God, and distin-

guish My cause from that of the ungodly people ' 

" (Ps. xliii. 1, 

Vulg.) 

Ver. 51.— Verily, verily, I say. He says this not from indignation 

but from pity of the Jews, showing that He is seeking not His own 

glory, but their salvation. " I say in very truth," and as S. Augustine 

thinks, he means / swear, " that if ye keep My commandments ye 

shall never die the death of the soul 

; 

ye shall never sin, for sin is the 

death of the soul. But ye shall ever live, here in the grace of God, 

and in heaven in His glory. Ye shall die indeed in the body, but 

I will raise you up in the day of judgment, and ye shall live in 

happiness of body and spirit for all eternity." So S. Augustine. 

Ver. 52. 

 

Now we know, &c. "The devil suggests to Thee such 

proud and absurd boasting, that Thy word will drive away death 

from those who believe in Thee, when we see that Prophets and 

holy men, as Abraham, all died. But as says S. Gregory [Horn, xviii.), 

looking only to the death of the body, they were dark to the word 

of truth. For as Bede saith, " Abraham, though dead in the body, was 

alive in his soul." Learn from this, thou Religious, thou Preacher, 

thou Christian, from thy Master to receive calumnies for thy good 

deeds, curses and ill-will for thy kindnesses. Learn also to be good 

to the ungrateful. For Christ, though unweariedly teaching the Jews, 

healing them, delivering them from evil spirits, yet patiently endured 

these contumelies and reproaches, ingratitude in return for kind-

nesses, blasphemies for miracles, and for His teaching derision and 

reprehension, and yet did not cease to benefit those who were 

ungrateful, the very highest point of patience and charity. 

Abraham is dead, &c. Thou blasphemest then, in making thy-

self greater than Abraham and the Prophets, yea, even greater than 

God Himself, since the word of God could not deliver Abraham 

and the Prophets from death. But yet the word of God, promulged 

by the lips of Christ, was more powerful than the word of God 

which was uttered to Abraham and the Prophets. And, moreover, 

Abraham and the Prophets were not dead in their souls, and

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyZRh0g6Ts4o-srjDtylF-K-Z-MPBxfaHGRlNDGLj1af4IgMkixbIRvhHwuKNjHXbQrm4h6ajUhpKZMkFPCRGbTyfSyu3A3tdUEK4fo7xt32YtSCFXk2UmDz1G-yo7iy0sLJO75cw=w615-h900-v0

b317e00b-604c-4acb-b584-85d73b248612

33° S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

though dead in the body were to be raised up by Christ to eternal 

life. 

Ver. 53. 

 

Art thou greater ? &c. They considered it most absurd, 

and even blasphemous, for Christ to prefer Himself to Abraham, as 

He really did ; for He was both God and man, though the Jews 

knew it not, or rather refused to believe it. 

Ver. 54. -Jesus answered, &c. This was in answer to their ques-

tion, Whom makest thou Thyselfi He refers all His glory to His 

Father from whom He is, and who is God. What I say of Myself 

is of no value or weight, and that not only with you, as S. 

Chrysostom says, but with others. For in every court no one is 

believed on his own word but on the testimony of others, who 

witness for him (see chap. v. 31). Solomon also says, "Let 

another praise thee, and not thine own lips " (Prov. xxvii. 2). The 

Arians objected that the Father glorifies the Son. He is therefore 

greater than the Son. S. Augustine replies, "Thou heretic, readest 

thou not that the Son Himself said that He glorifies His Father? 

But He also glorifies the Son, and the Son glorifies the Father. Put 

aside thy pernicious teaching, acknowledge their equality, correct 

thy perversity." 

Ver. 55.— Yet ye have not known Him, &c. (1.) Ye know not the 

true God whom ye worship 

; 

ye know Him not to be one in essence 

and threefold in person, for ye think Him to be one in Person, as 

He is one in essence. Ye know not that God is a Father, and that 

He begat Me His Son, and that we two by our Breath produced 

the Holy Ghost. For had ye known it, ye would certainly have 

known and believed Me to be the Messiah, the Son of God ; and 

conversely, " if ye had known Me, ye would assuredly have known 

My Father," says S. Chrysostom. 

(2.) S. Augustine says, Ye believe that there is one God, though 

ye neither see nor hear Him (see chap. v. 37). Ye ought there-

fore equally to believe in Me His Son, on account of the many 

signs and wonders which I work, though ye see not the Godhead 

which is hid within. (3.) Ye have not known Him, ye have not 

believed His testimony, This is My beloved Son ; for ye knew not,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw3WOt_wLGaCQr9pZ6ZsWU3blPzEK78ErJRrTQMfTnTRWhP1zwZHsHTjVM_k1wmHnIz3dEtPEDdajobX8WLeP6bmloaZ69pLAI1SICouZfRXeCjb2hj2ppYOUgVB0_BN4qaRi6hMw=w615-h900-v0

1ff91e61-a10d-4b21-b851-4d6df1b05e09

WHY THE JEWS LIARS. 33 

 

or rather would not know, that this was the true voice of God. 

(4.) Euthymius explains, "Ye have not shown that ye know Him, 

because ye live wickedly, not as worshippers of God, but like 

idolatrous Gentiles, professing, as S. Paul says, to know Him (Tit. 

i. 16), but in works denying Him." 

And if I say, &c. Maldonatus thinks that Christ called the 

Jews "liars," because they said to Him, "Thou art a Samaritan, 

and hast a devil." For these were two most gross falsehoods, nay 

even blasphemies. But S. Chrysostom, Amnion ius, and Theo-

phylact are more to the point in asserting that they were called 

"liars," because they lied in saying that they knew God. For 

they believed not that He had a Son, and was threefold in His 

personality. 

But I know Him, &c. Theophylact explains it thus, "I show 

by my life and conduct that I know, reverence, and worship God, 

because I reverently observe and constantly fulfil His word. Or it 

may be explained, even better, in this way. Because I acknowledge 

God the Father, and clearly perceive His Majesty, Power, and 

Holiness ; I therefore, as man, greatly reverence Him, and clearly 

and fully observe His precept, which ye Jews do not observe, 

because ye know not nor comprehend His Majesty, and therefore 

do not reverence it." So Theophylact. Moreover, S. Augustine says, 

" He spake as the Son, the Word of the Father, and was the very 

Word of the Father Who spake to men." And He fitly said the 

" word" not the "precept" because He Himself was the Word of 

the Father, and the Father had ordered Him to announce to men 

that very truth, that they should acknowledge, believe, and worship 

God the Father and God the Son. 

Ver. 56.— Your father Abraham, &c. He longed for it with 

exulting mind ; " He feared not, but exulted," says S. Augustine. 

" Believing he exulted with hope, that he might see by understand-

ing." It is a catachresis. But what day ? S. Augustine understands 

by it, that day of all eternity, wherein from all eternity the Son was 

begotten of the Father. " He wished to know My eternal genera-

tion and My Godhead, that he might believe in it, and be thereby

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx46NLh3QYaV8VHAp8_fuRnpDjoEtItfpR1vDDWlQU9oLS4czFzz0do3I6rRPPn8O7cx2S5Yx9X8fQTeK8NA9LV3GcuCa_QvudzP2BEH2BKvm5u2NyACYct5Ws3DECMA1H0ihWXFw=w615-h900-v0

42079634-bd37-4d1f-bb9b-8c861617a984

332 S. JOHN, C. VIII. 

saved." " He saw," says S. Augustine, " My day, because he acknow-

ledged the mystery of the Trinity." (Bede follows him, as usual.) S. 

Jerome (on Dan. viii.) and S. Gregory (in loc.) say that it was the 

day when, by the three angels that appeared to him, only one of 

whom spoke to him, the mystery of the Trinity was by symbols 

revealed to him ; he saw three but adored one (Gen. xviii. 2). 

(1.) But others generally refer it to the day of His Humanity, 

and thus understand it of the day of His Passion, Crucifixion, and 

death. See S. Chrysostom, &c. (2.) It is more simple to under-

stand it of the day of His Incarnation. For all the Prophets and 

Patriarchs earnestly longed for the coming of Christ, to free them 

from their sins and from their imperfect state {limbo). "To see" 

(says John Alba) " is to enjoy the happiness and blessings brought by 

Christ." The word has often that meaning, as in the Psalm "to see 

the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living," i.e., to enjoy it. 

He saw it. By faith, and again in a figure when he was com-

manded by God to offer up his son Isaac, which was a type of 

Christ's offering on the Cross. So S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine, 

and S. Bernard (Serm. vi. de. Vigil Natalis) adds that by smiting on 

his thigh he signified that Christ was to come from his race. 

(2.) He knew by prophetical revelation. But this would not be 

"seeing." 

(3.) The genuine meaning is, he saw from his own place (in limbo). 

He knew the day when Christ was incarnate and was born, not 

only from what Simeon told him, when he met him in the place 

below (in limbo), but also from what Anna the Prophetess, Zacharias, 

Anna the Virgin's Mother, and S. John the Baptist told him, but he 

saw it by intuitive perception. He saw all, just as the Blessed in 

heaven behold all things on earth and under the earth, and as S. 

Anselm saw with his eyes lifted up by God what was doing behind 

a wall. Abraham longingly desired to see this, as if present. For 

the promise that Christ should be born of him had been frequently 

made him by God. And it was due to him, in consequence of his 

faith, obedience, and many merits, that as the father of the faithful, 

who for so long a time, without any fault of his own, was so long

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwubA3JbML2KSdTmK6n8HxhXxNFIE4B10ZZF2hf1ujqWxk92lvDq-vykiJwmPlBuHrZjXRxJwBwwUsgkKJKzA4E9jtMnY9K5xFe6eD9C2BDCOMwAUaDhk4Ql0A66U8Ij7vhZ73JGg=w615-h900-v0

d1281cd5-1d3e-42f5-9726-606dd22d7a12

ABRAHAM KNEW WHEN CHRIST WAS BORN. 333 

detained in prison (limbo), most eagerly looking for Christ to deliver 

him, might for his own consolation, and that of his fellow-patriarchs, 

and in solace of their long and anxious expectation, know the very 

day when Christ was Incarnate and born. For two thousand years 

had he eagerly waited for Christ and sighed for His birth. And 

therefore God revealed it to him by His Spirit, and then Abraham 

and all the Saints in prison rejoiced and were glad. So Jansen, 

Maldonatus, and others. Lastly, the angels who comfort souls in 

Purgatory, much more consoled the souls of Abraham and the 

Patriarchs (in limbo), even as the same angels announced that much 

longed-for birth to the shepherds. Christ said this, (1.) To show 

that He was greater than Abraham, and that He was God, (2.) to 

show how highly He was valued, though absent, by Abraham, though 

the Jews despised Him when present among them. (3.) And also 

to prick their consciences indirectly in this way : " Abraham had so 

great a longing for Me, but ye have rejected Me. Ye are therefore 

not true children of Abraham, but spurious and degenerate." He 

says "Abraham your father," whose children ye glory in being, 

though I do not glory in him, but he rather glories and exults in 

Me. 

Ver. 57. 

 

Thou art not yet, &c. So that Abraham on his part 

could have seen Thee, and rejoiced at the sight. Irenseus hence 

infers that Christ lived fifty years on earth (adv. Hcer. ii. 39, 40). 

But it is the common opinion that He was on earth for only thirty-

four (and those not complete) years. S. Chrysostom and Euthymius 

read forty years, but the common reading is fifty. The Jews seem 

to have been thinking of the Jubilee. " Thou hast not reached one 

Jubilee, how then canst Thou say that Thou hast seen Abraham, 

who lived forty Jubilees before ? " (So Severus of Antioch in Catena. 

) 

But Euthymius thinks that Christ seemed to the Jews, by reason of 

the maturity of His judgment and the gravity of His bearing, 

and also from the labours He had undergone in journeying and 

preaching, to be fifty years old. But you may easily say that the 

Jews, in order to avoid exception or mistake, put His age much 

higher than they knew He had attained to.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAypHYYacevfxFztbbC_Kph2JnmOnhRB0dyubMvFwUxDe0gj2SZCJWbUFrao64FfppLhlSPTMWpVtE0KykV6fcPfbTqGVhJ-B65OPN_kNYkk9aBBY-eBCUp1d0tQVpra9kXoHKjQ=w615-h900-v0

57555381-d572-413c-a08b-17a60f018476

334 s - John, c. viii. 

Ver. 58.—Jesus said, &c. That is, / am God. The word am 

denotes eternity, which is ever present, and has no past or future. 

I am eternal, immutable, and ever the same. So S. Augustine, 

Bede, S. Gregory. I as God exceed the age of Abraham not by 

fifty years, but by infinite durations of years. For as Tertullian 

(de Trinit.) says, unless He had been God, He could not, as being 

descended from Abraham, have been before him. Hear S. Augus-

tine on this passage, "Before Abraham was made, that refers to 

human nature, but / am pertains to the Divine Substance ; was 

made (Vulg.), because Abraham was a creature. He said not, 

'Before Abraham was, I am,' but Before Abraham was made, I am. 

Nor did He say, 'Before Abraham was made, I was made.' For in 

the beginning God made heaven and earth ; for in the beginning 

was the Word. Before Abraham was made, I am. Acknowledge 

the Creator, distinguish the creature. He who spake was made of 

the seed of Abraham ; and in order that Abraham might be made, 

He was (existed) before Abraham." 

Ver. 59. 

 

Then they took up, &c, as a blasphemer, who placed 

Himself above Abraham, and made Himself equal to God. Blas-

phemers were ordered to be stoned (Lev. xxiv. 16). It is clear that 

these Jews were not those who were said to have believed in Him 

(as Theophylact supposes), but the others who were opposed to 

Christ. "And to what should such hardness betake itself but to 

stones?" says S. Augustine (in loc.) "They sought to crush Him, 

whom they could not understand," says S. Gregory (Horn, xviii.) 

But Jesus hid Himself, &c. He made Himself invisible, and thus 

passed unharmed through the midst of them. So Leontius and 

others. S. Gregory says, " Had He willed to exercise His power, 

He would have bound them in their sins, or would have plunged 

them into the pains of eternal death. But He who came to suffer, 

would not exercise judgment." And S. Augustine, " He would 

rather commend to us His patience, than exercise His power. He forsakes them, since they would not accept His correction. He hides not Himself in a corner of the temple, as if afraid, or running 

into a cottage, or turning aside behind a wall or column : but by

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzfXx4R9gLAGeBUHP2TY2jaM6t9eN9KCrf6VOVBoYaxI8ETdpiFrKBTnByWQzY1cyP2PnX39XWvL7rSdjI3J_xRKpGDqeiIcSTa66-o8JFPKwoxXw4O96caTUWSn8vPV44rdgeyqg=w615-h900-v0

d7d8baae-0b98-459c-ad5a-e1609e229b13

CHRIST FLIES AS MAN. 33 

 

His Divine Power making Himself invisible, He passed through 

their midst. As man He fled from the stones, but woe to them 

from whose stony hearts God flies away. 

Morally, we are taught by this example (says S. Gregory) humbly 

to avoid the anger of the proud, even when we have the power to 

resist them.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwBeiNor7n0e6FeyjndRK1CX5Cb68bsAAZ_AVom0BgjFIy-pdPGguULRA5K0kkLzyuSPDl4clbuJRCvON-57CZnf7CEt3inml3FsGiprgDhhXfZHfTQpTF_oOKGO6uy3YJ05EYbIA=w615-h900-v0

502c3c00-73d3-4da9-953c-2a875f0894fb

( 336 ) 

CHAPTER IX. 

I Christ on the Sabbath day heals the man who mas bom blind. 14 The Pharisees 

accuse Him of breaking the sabbath ; but the man who was healed defends 

Him ; 34, is therefore cast out of the Synagogue : but Christ receives and 

teaches him. 

AND as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. 

2 And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man or 

his parents, that he was born blind? 

3 Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents : but that the 

works of God should be made manifest in him. 

4 I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day : the night cometh. 

when no man can work. 

5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. 

6 When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the 

spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, 

7 And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which is by interpreta-

tion, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing. 

8 IT The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that he 

was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged ? 

9 Some said, This is he : others said, He is like him : but he said, I am he. 

10 Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened ? 

1 

 

He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed 

mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash : and I went 

and washed, and I received sight. 

12 Then said they unto him, Where is he ? He said, I know not. 

13 IT They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. 

14 And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes. 

15 Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. 

He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. 

16 Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he 

keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do 

such miracles ? And there was a division among them. 

1 

 

They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath 

opened thine eyes ? He said, He is a prophet. 

18 But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and 

received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his sight. 

19 And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind ? 

how then doth he now see ?

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxNKhzywW8seLl-DlTZsD41GhR8BmeMco6D41eVG3h-JX1ws9eKORiag-itZ0_th8Kqb3rUQH_3hz7XGTfEcRuPcy1zsTXvA3ktmUpug-I19S84KpmiuIQUnUfdtTBxbMVBccgA=w615-h900-v0

ecc04489-ac74-4ee0-bee4-ef5cab197001

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. 337 

20 His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and 

that he was born blind : 

21 But by what means he now seeth, we know not ; or who hath opened his 

eyes, we know not : he is of age ; ask him : he shall speak for himself. 

22 These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews : for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be 

put out of the synagogue. 

23 Therefore said his parents, He is of age ; ask him, 

24 Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give 

God the praise : we know that this man is a sinner. 

25 He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not : one 

thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see. 

26 Then said they to him again, What did he to thee ? how opened he thine 

eyes ? 

27 He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear : wherefore 

would ye hear it again ? will ye also be his disciples ? 

28 Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple ; but we are Moses' 

disciples. 

29 We know that God spake unto Moses : as for this felloiv, we know not from 

whence he is. 

30 The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marvellous thing, 

that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes. 

31 Now we know that God heareth not sinners : but if any man be a worshipper 

of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth. 

32 Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of 

one that was born blind. 

33 If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. 

34 They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and 

dost thou teach us ? And they cast him out. 

35 Jesus heard that they had cast him out ; and when he had found him, he 

said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God ? 

36 He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him ? 

37 And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh 

with thee. 

38 And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him. 

36 IT And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which 

see not might see ; and that they which see might be made blind. 

40 And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and 

said unto him, Are we blind also ? 

41 Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin : but now ye 

say, We see ; therefore your sin remaineth. 

Ver. 1. 

 

And as Jesus passed by, &c. Passing through the 

midst of His enemies and the crowd of the people. This signifies 

(though some deny it) that this cure took place immediately 

after Christ had withdrawn from the temple. As soon as He had 

escaped His enemies, He became visible again, and His disciples 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzkodmiVJGzZ1Ko33t-0HeNIo7o5ni6fZOBUAwnLKg5HY9gsk3F807Gm7__JVwuCKowgJ9uKf5LvfsB3RHQPtVMgvhSGKl_e4ZhHH-dHhYD0qqjvkei9NuFbu2UhcaGMA-NMABtRg=w615-h900-v0

74f144ff-1641-4534-8245-890c76c57280

338 s. john, c. ix. 

followed Him. " He mitigated their anger by His withdrawal, and 

softened their hardness by working a miracle " says S. Chrysostom. 

He looked upon him tenderly and fixedly, as pitying him, and 

intending to restore his sight. And this intent look caused the 

disciples to inquire the cause of his blindness. "He Himself" 

(says S. Chrysostom) "saw that he was blind. The blind man did 

not come to Him, but He looked on him so stedfastly, that the 

disciples asked the question which follows." Mystically, sinners and 

unbelievers are blind, and are thus unable to see and seek for 

Christ. So that Christ must needs look on them first and enlighten 

them with the eyes of His grace. 

His blindness was congenital and incurable. If it had been 

accidental, surgeons could have cured it. But when a man is 

cured who is blind from his birth, " it is not a matter of skill," says 

S. Ambrose, " but of power. The Lord gave him soundness, but 

not by the exercise of the medicinal art. The Lord healed those 

whom none could cure." His name is said to have been Cedonius 

or Celedonius (see ver. 38). 

Mystically, this man is a type of mankind, blinded by original sin, 

which Jesus, " passing along the road of our mortality " (says the 

Gloss), "looked upon, pitied and enlightened." "For blindness 

befel the first man through sin, and as we spring from him, the 

human race is blind from its birth." And Bede, " The way of 

Christ is His descent from heaven to earth. But He beheld the 

blind man, when He beheld mankind with pity." Again: "This 

blind man denotes the Gentiles born and brought up in the dark-

ness of unbelief and idolatry, to whom Christ passed over, when 

expelled from the hearts of the Jews, and enlightened them with the 

light of faith and His Gospel," says Bede. And Christ wished to 

designate this in type by the enlightenment of this blind man. So 

S. Cyril, Rupert, and Bede. 

Ver. 2. 

 

And His disciples, &c. This question sprang out of the 

opinion of the ignorant multitude, who think that diseases are the 

punishments of sin, and, as S. Ambrose says, " They ascribe weak-

nesses of body to the deserts of their sins." But they are wrong in this 

;

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwflJaZLEJPoBw_Nam3U00kQpJNklrDJRaL_hdlgAQPC87b0dD06FT5C2QqyAvHuhMdFhInlbt_rIBSzm1mb3RjxE2AyeEg0JxoUe3VQXwXcjU-ZjOz50uVu-XXx0ikWTYaxohx=w615-h900-v0

068a955c-a579-47ea-92fb-b184774673c4

SOULS NOT PRE-EXISTENT. 339 

for though it is often the case, yet not always. For Job, though 

innocent, was afflicted in order to try his patience, as Tobias also, 

and many others. S. Chrysostom and Theophylact say that this 

question was out of place and absurd. 

Others think that the disciples were led to ask this question by 

what Christ said (v. 14), "Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen 

to thee." 

A man's own fault, and not that of another, seems to be the cause 

of his own blindness, by way of punishment. Original sin is in 

truth the cause of all the evils and punishments which befal us in 

this life, and of the diseases of infants especially as S. Augustine 

teaches us (Conir. Julian iii. 4). But this was not the special 

reason why this man, above all other infants, was born blind. 

Whence S. Augustine says, " This man could not have been born 

without original sin ; nor yet have added nothing to it by his life. 

He therefore and his parents had sin, but the sin was not the cause 

of his being born blind." 

S. Cyril supposes that the disciples were imbued with the error of 

Pythagoras and Plato, who thought that souls existed before their 

bodies, and that for their sins they were thrust down into bodies, as 

Origen afterwards held. But Leontius considers that the disciples 

did not speak of the sin of the blind man which took place before 

his birth, but after it. As if God, foreseeing what would happen 

punished him beforehand with blindness. But whatever might be 

the opinion of the disciples (and it is hard to conjecture), it is certain 

they were wrong. For souls did not exist before their bodies, and 

God only punishes past and not future sins. God, it is true, 

punishes the sins of parents in the persons of their children. And 

children are frequently born weak, blind, and deformed, &c., or soon 

die, in consequence of the vices of their parent (see 2 Sam. xii. 14, 

and Exod. xx. 5). 

Ver. $.—Jesus answered, &c. Christ denies not that he and his 

parents had sinned both by original and actual sin. But He denies 

that he was condemned to blindness for these sins, beyond other 

people, who had committed the same and even greater sins. So S.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxz15MTxM5G6DSLjC5YpHNXBAHBKKU_xj0Bj2jNN4leIbF2cKV1UufL-sqWHkIEVvSpyeZBj_NxtZ8TJeaHuDjSrasR0fPXy1_vntO7P0F6Q1Q0FILIV48YQaZ2Dbc3Ioi3XZ2XkQ=w615-h900-v0

a725cca1-d982-4725-93f9-94d26f921eb8

340 S. JOHN, C. IX. 

Augustine. In vain therefore do the Pelagians misuse this passage 

to do away with original sin. 

The reason why God inflicted blindness on this man was that 

the miraculous power of Christ should be made manifest in his case, 

and thus Christ be acknowledged as the true Messiah. So' the 

Fathers quoted above. The Gloss gives the mystical meaning, 

that it was to signify what Christ would do in enlightening mankind 

in like manner by His grace, and the doctrine of the Gospel. And 

accordingly the man himself was enlightened not only in his body, 

but in his mind, as will be seen below. And therefore he suffered 

no wrong, but gained a benefit by his blindness (says S. Chrysostom), 

for in consequence of it he beheld with the eyes of his mind, Him 

who from nothing brought him into being, and received from Him 

enlightenment both in body and in mind. 

Ver. 4.—/ must work, &c. S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and 

others understand by the word " day " the present life, and by 

" night " the future life. But this is what is common to all men. 

But Christ speaks of this day as specially relating to Himself and 

His own work. And therefore S. Augustine, Cyril, and Bede put a 

better and closer meaning on the word day, as speaking of the 

life of Christ on earth, and night as referring to His absence, mean-

ing by this, that just as men cannot work at night on account of the 

darkness, so after death shall I no longer work as I do now for the 

salvation and redemption of men. " My day " (viii. 56) means in 

like manner My birth and My life amongst men. He says this, as 

preparing the way for the healing of the blind man. " I am sent 

into the world to do good to men : this blind man presents himself 

and I will restore his sight." Symbolically : Night, says the Interlinear 

Gloss, is the persecution of the Apostles, especially by antichrist. 

Tropologically : The time of life given to every one to gain eternal 

glory is his "day." Night is his death (see Eccles. ix. 10). And S. 

Augustine (in loc.) says, "Night is that of which it is said, 'Cast him 

into outer darkness.' Then will be the night, when no man can 

work, but only receive for what he hath wrought. Work while 

thou art alive, lest thou be prevented by that night." It was com-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy3ci9ukJqFcuYvjL6c-fZa1r9326s_YEdU2oFWFdipQG2tgJMJHW5ZbxlLA4S6dnOuydgiLsWiyfPcwHxOUwyt4XyI0EtYv6LtXhDD5tiH3j2BK3paZtayZVASmPYloCMkl9rc=w615-h900-v0

4d8ceb5d-db95-4c9e-8575-ccf7aa317954

THE TRUE EYE- SALVE. 34t 

mon among poets and philosophers to call life day, and death night, 

and many instances and authorities are given from Pagan writers to 

this purpose. But to take some Christian ones, Messodamus, a 

very holy man, was once asked by a friend to dine with him on the 

morrow. " I have had no morrow," he replied, " for many years ; 

every day have I looked for the coming of death." And this is what 

S. Anthony {apud S. Athanasius) and Barlaam advised every devout 

and " religious " man to do. S. Jerome wisely says, " One who is 

ever thinking that he will die, easily makes light of everything," for 

he regards each day as his last. 

" Fixed is the day of death alike to all, 

Brief life's short hours soon pass beyond recal." 

— Virg. ALn. x. 

Ver. 5. 

 

As long as I am in the world, &c. And therefore I will 

give light to this blind man, to show that I am the Light of this 

world. 

Ver. 6. And when He had thus said, &c. He used clay, which 

naturally closes up the eyes, to show that He healed the man super-

naturally. The symbolical reason was (S. Chrysostom says) to 

signify that He was the self-same (God) who formed man out of 

clay, and that it was His work to form and fashion again (by 

restoring his sight) a man who was formed by Him, but deformed 

by blindness. He showed thus that He was the Lord of all things, 

and of the Sabbath also, so as to work His cure on that day 

whatever outcry the Pharisees might make. So Cyril, Leontius, 

Theophylact. Accordingly the Interlinear Gloss says, " See, here is 

the eye-salve with which mankind is anointed, the thought, namely, 

of its own vileness, as being made of clay, so as to be cured of the 

pride which had blinded it. According to the saying, ' Remember, 

O man, that thou art dust, and into dust thou wilt return.' " Christ 

used His spittle, says Cyril, to show that even His Flesh had a 

supernatural power of healing. (2.) Because spittle is a symbol of 

recuperative power (several derivations of "saliva" are here sug-

gested which are of no value, and several instances of cures by its 

use). (3.) He used it that no virtue should be ascribed to the pool

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzHXbGndZNUWWoMthmTq4bLGjQD94Lgma0KKsZZkfSdyfy7hslRwkRkxpxxDdBO0ive21OLVL7peiBBFtFnBzh51YqEyTaLAianjDIKtjlBONitnEJbtHrCYFxOiD2uCFy_uWyQ=w615-h900-v0

b60f99b2-079c-44b7-a133-0d54ee5ba49c

342 S. JOHN, c. IX 

of Siloam, but to the power of His own mouth from whence it came 

; 

for by the bidding of His own mouth He drove away the blindness. 

(4.) That thus this miracle might be the more fully attested. (5.) 

To test the faith and obedience of the blind man (see S. Chry-

sostom). Why did He send him to Siloam, that all men might 

see him going with the clay on his eyes ? But there was no reason 

to fear that the cure would be attributed to Siloam, because many 

had washed there without being cured. But the faith of the blind 

man was shown by his not saying a word or having a thought 

against it, but he simply obeyed. 

Allegorically. S. Augustine says, " Christ made clay of the 

spittle because the Word was made flesh." He anointed the eyes 

of the blind man, but yet he did not see, for when He anointed him 

He most likely made him a catechumen. He sends him to the 

pool of Siloam. For being baptized in Christ he is illuminated. 

The Gloss says, " The spittle is the wisdom which came forth from 

the mouth of the Most High ; the earth is the flesh of Christ, to 

anoint the eyes is to make a catechumen. He that believeth in 

the Word made flesh is sent to wash, that is to be baptized in 

Siloam, that is in Him that was sent, i.e., in Christ. But he who is 

baptized receives the light of the mind through faith, hope, and 

charity, which are infused into him by God in baptism." 

Ver. 7. 

 

And said unto Him, &c. Siloam is a stream at the foot 

of Mount Sion, which does not flow continuously, but at uncertain 

times of the day ; it bursts forth (says S. Jerome) with a loud noise, 

and is then silent. It hides itself under the earth, and by channels 

runs into the pool of Siloam, and hence is conveyed silently and 

gently into the royal gardens, which it waters. (See S. Jerome on 

Is. viii.) Epiphanius thus gives its history. " God made the 

fount of Siloam at the request of the Prophet (Isaiah), who shortly 

before his death prayed that He would grant the waters to flow from 

that place, and He immediately poured down from heaven living 

waters ; whence the place obtained the name Siloam, which means sent 

down. And under king Hezekiah, before he built the pool, a small 

stream sprang up at the prayers of Isaiah (for they were hard pressed

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxC3EJkrssGGb-5kDwHJoZmYajsDB034MHDNu63lcyAMqbGH6rHwFsKYdI51TLoymQQggzzX4fwa9WsD-_R_J8Y2CEbxZSUXCds2bvxDsIAPNpfAHQce5FV2kZvT-zZtfdwKOniMg=w615-h900-v0

503b18df-2964-47b9-918f-95966f547213

SILOAM A TYPE OF CHRIST. 343 

by the enemy), that the people might not perish for lack of water. 

The soldiers searched everywhere for water and could not tell where 

to find it. But when the poor Jews went to seek water it burst out 

for them in a stream. But strangers could not find it, for the 

water withdrew itself. And even up to the present time it bursts 

forth secretly, thus signifying a mystery." Epiphanius records this 

in his life of the Prophet. Baronius compares it to a stream in 

Palestine called Sabbaticus, because it flowed only on the Sabbath. 

(See Baronius a.d. 33, cap. xxvi., and Josephus, de Bello Jitd. cap. 

xiv.) S. Irenseus (iv. 19) says that Siloam effected its cures very 

frequently on the Sabbath. 

(2.) From Siloam, flowing as it did at intervals, and in a country 

where there was a want of water, the water was drawn gently and 

noiselessly into the pool, or bath, and thence passed into the 

gardens. From this letting in and letting out of the waters it was 

called Siloam from the root schalach. 

But why did Christ send the blind man to this particular pool ? 

(1.) Because it was a type of Himself, who was sent into the world, 

to enlighten it. (See S. Chrysostom and S. Irenaeus, iv. 19.) (2.) 

Because Christ was meek and gentle like its waters, and because 

He was secretly and silently sent forth by the Father, as God in 

heaven, and on earth by His birth from the Virgin. He is also, 

like Siloam, a fountain of water, "springing up into eternal life." 

(3.) He is the Fount of graces, who distributes His gifts to the faith-

ful by channels. (See Is. xii. 3, and Zech. xiii. 1, and notes thereon.) 

And Isaiah, who was an express type of Christ both in his life and 

martyrdom, caused this pool to be built. (4.) Solomon was anointed 

to be king near the spot. Hence the waters of Siloam signify the 

royal race of David. And Christ sent the blind man there to show 

that He was the Son of David. (5.) He sent the blind man to 

Siloam to recall the prophecy of Jacob (Gen. xlix. 10), as indicating 

that he was the messenger and ambassador sent from the Father. 

(6.) Siloam was the type of Christian Baptism, whereby we are 

spiritually enlightened. Baptism is called in Greek <j>ari6[ihi. (See 

S. Ambrose, Epist. lxxv., and S. Augustine in loc.) And hence S.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxWY7dLiiNUeWpjoeo09gz9Tm7f5DJHQ-s899IZnTPacrcJJNTRJC7CVKMZDc1cu0jMLZd3ZxiFe-Sl1COhHQB9akj6Jyg_2ZhDf9ogdXEGlp-f5j5baUfQByyMB_t8GNrMnEWY=w615-h900-v0

b34dd15a-bd12-4a1d-aa50-13113b38ee48

344 S. TOIIN, c. ix. 

Irenasus (v. 15) thinks that this man was enlightened both in 

body and mind by the waters of Siloam. (7.) There is great affinitv 

between water and light, ablution and illumination. The Hebrew 

word ain signifies both a fountain and light. Cicero and Quinctilian 

speak of the lights of wisdom, and floods of oratory, &c. And 

even the Psalmist uses both terms, " For with Thee is the well of 

life, and in Thy Light shall we see light." And here too Christ 

connects light with a fountain. For after having said, " I am the 

Light of the world," He sent the blind man to Siloam to recover his 

sight. Water washes away the noxious humours of the eyes, and 

thus gives them light. 

Adrichomius describes Siloam and the virtue of its waters, 

speaking of the value Saracens and Turks put upon them, especially 

for restoring the sight. And no wonder. For as Christ, by being 

baptized in Jordan, sanctified the waters, and gave them the power 

of washing away sins in baptism ; in like manner by giving sight to 

the blind man by the waters of Siloam, He seemed to have conferred 

on them a somewhat similar power of giving sight to others, and 

accordingly S. Helena (says Nicephorus, viii. 30) erected some 

magnificent works about the pool. S. Chrysostom (in loc.) says 

that in Siloam was the virtue of Christ which cured the blind man. 

For as the apostles called Christ " a spiritual door," so was He a 

spiritual Siloam. (So too S. Cyril, and S. Basil on Isaiah viii. 6, 

and Eusebius, Demonst. Evang. vii. 2.) 

Which is by interpretation. " Sent," because it was a type of the 

Messiah, whose name was Siloach (i.e., sent, or to be sent, by God). 

For unless He had been sent, none of us (says S. Augustine) would 

have been delivered from his guilt. 

He went therefore, &c. Not by the virtue of the waters of 

Siloam, but by that of Christ, who used these waters for the 

enlightenment of the blind man, as He uses the waters of Baptism 

for the purification and enlightenment of the soul. " In Siloam," 

says S. Chrysostom, "was the virtue of Christ, which cured the 

blind man." But the faith and obedience of the blind man merited 

this, not of condignity, but of congruity. For he believed that he

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyQjHhE5RI9ylUPSXn8dyAHiyrT2lKnfuREj9GagNTgQow0cHtFcE6L-XIgCkMcBfBJZWqEiapXcbCPeUAif4xpKuWPkLFns-GHr7wNsZ2R73jPy9q5iYqTLF4bby4DjU8-mT1j=w615-h900-v0

46784233-a283-46c5-9d73-412d89a6fa80

THE POOR THE SPECIAL CARE OF B.V.M. 34$ 

would recover his sight by washing away in the waters of Siloam 

the clay which Christ had put on his eyes. For had he not 

believed this, he would not have kept the clay on his eyes, to the 

ridicule of those who saw him ; nor would he have gone to Siloam, 

nor have there washed away the clay from his eyes. The Gloss 

says with less truth, " How was this man healed without faith, when 

nobody is said to have been healed outwardly by Christ without 

being healed within ? " This is said of those who were sick on 

account of their sins, but he was suffering for the glory of God ; for 

as I have shown, his faith and obedience were great, and by them 

was he alike justified, as we shall hear at the end of the chapter. 

So Elisha cleansed from his leprosy Naaman the Syrian by means 

of the waters of Jordan. And he also made sweet the bitter waters 

by the salt which was thrown into them. S. Augustine remarks that 

Christ was " the day who divided the light from the darkness, when 

He took away his blindness and restored him his sight." 

Ver. 8, 9.— 77;<? neighbours therefore, &c, and they that saw him, 

that he was a beggar, &c. (Vulg.) "The greatness of the deed 

brought about incredulity," says S. Chrysostom. "And the opening 

of the eyes had changed the appearance of the blind man," says S. 

Augustine, " so that looking on him they doubted whether he who 

saw was the one who aforetime was blind ; but carefully watching 

him as he walked along the long way, they acknowledged him to be 

the same, and that it could not be denied." So S. Chrysostom. 

The wondrous mercy of God healed most carefully those who 

were beggars, counting those who were mean of birth to be worthy 

of His providential care ; for He came for the healing of all. Thus 

many poor people and of slender means obtain of the Blessed 

Virgin miracles of healing, at her shrines at Loretto and Sichem, 

both because they are in greater need than the rich, and are more 

innocent in their lives, also exhibit greater faith and devotion, and 

because she specially cares for them, as being destitute 

; 

just as it 

is said, " The poor committeth himself to Thee [is left to Thy care] 

 

Thou art the helper of the orphan" (Ps. x. 14). 

Ver. 10. 

 

Therefore said they unto him, &c. "The man," says

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzYELoTNxiZHlOfZ9yX_kGrmG-gM52_yXoKJUJeGe_dYOe4hsseJmcEqzOPsS0S27IMLdSd9VXEg5A_DH7-QpAjo4iARfPdcD3CvIxfspv-4IT1A77i5tIZvQKfN7paCWjWMM8y=w615-h900-v0

4f7c3b19-5a9a-468b-96fd-eefaf113bdd6

346 S. JOHN, c. IX. 

Euthymius and Theophylact, " knew not as yet that Jesus was God." 

The blind man had learned the name of Jesus from common report, 

or from asking the bystanders. That he called Him not Rabbi, 

must be ascribed partly to his simplicity and candour, and partly to 

his truthfulness. For in order that he might not give any weight 

to his own opinion respecting Christ, he spake only the bare truth, 

and merely called Him Jesus. Perhaps he did it, likewise, in order 

not to excite the Jews, who were opposed to Christ, the more 

against Him. 

Ver. 12. 

 

And they said to him, Where is He? He said, I know 

not. For Jesus had withdrawn Himself, as shrinking from praise 

 

for He did not, says S. Chrysostom, " seek for glory, or self-

display." 

Ver. 13. They brought to the Pharisees, &c. They brought him 

to the Pharisees, that they might examine the matter. This was 

done by the purpose of God, that the miracle might be fully attested 

and made widely known, so that the Pharisees could not deny it. 

Whence S. Augustine says, "The blind man confessed, the heart of 

the wicked was broken." "They bring him to the Pharisees, as 

being judges, and therefore assembled in their house of judgment." 

This house seems to have been a synagogue, close to the temple 

for a question of religion and belief was at stake, which the Pharisees 

had to decide by examining the miracle, and to judge accordingly 

whether He who wrought it was the Messiah or not. 

It was the Sabbath day. This is added to show their evil dis-

position ; for they sought occasion against Jesus, and wished to 

detract from the miracle in consequence of its seeming violation of 

the law. For in truth to make clay in order to give sight to the 

blind, is not a breaking but a sanctification of the Sabbath. 

Ver. 17. They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of 

Him who hath opened thine eyes ? He said, He is a Prophet. That is 

a specially holy man, a wonder-worker. So Abraham (Gen xx. 7) 

is called a Prophet (see what is said on 1 Cor. xiv. ad rem, and Ecclus. 

xlviii. 12, on the various meanings of the word Prophet). " Being at 

present not anointed in heart, he did not confess Christ to be the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzhVHAtEaKNHRqr4IqHi2gBt0dVEK1kvF2l21K1OmR4asYp4pvO0MM_Qq3MKj5RTsILxJFYqy8JX3DveXjzmzlXZNFC4-fOMsNFkNK1sgITarKe4BUP_UVHvKXzxrGq6euSSg9QKQ=w615-h900-v0

939b2e6b-2317-4205-922e-9ff0a0f9d80d

BITTERNESS OE THE JEWS. 347 

Son of God. But yet he did not speak falsely of Him. For the 

Lord said of Himself, " A prophet is not without honour, save in His 

own country." 

They asked the blind man the same question again and again, 

out of bitter hatred of Christ, and also to involve him in the same 

guilt with Christ. They wished also to elicit something out of his 

mouth to make him contradict himself, that so they might convict 

him of a lie. But God caught them in their own craftiness. For 

by this frequent examination, the consistent confession of the blind 

man, and consequently the glory of Christ, shone forth. S. 

Chrysostom wisely says, "It is the nature of truth to become 

stronger by the snares laid against it." And that was now the case, 

for the parents are brought forward, who fully acknowledged their 

son, and confirmed his words. 

Ver 18. 

 

But the Jews did not believe, &c. They hoped to elicit 

something from them to refute either the blind man or Christ, " by 

finding that he was not born blind," says S. Chrysostom, or was not 

quite blind but dim-sighted, or that he regained his sight by magic, 

and not by the miracle wrought by Christ. " They sought," says S. 

Augustine, " how they might accuse him, that they might cast him 

out of the synagogue," as they shortly afterwards did. Theophylact 

states that this was their dilemma. It is either false that your son 

now sees, or that he was blind at first. But it is admitted that he 

sees, it was therefore false that he was, as he says, previously blind. 

His parents reply cautiously. They knew him to be their son, and 

that he was born blind. But how he gained his sight they knew 

not. They speak with prudence so as not to deny the truth, nor 

yet incur the peril of excommunication. And hence they say, 

" He is of age," meaning, says S. Augustine, " we should justly be 

compelled to speak for an infant, for it could not speak for itself. 

But he is a man who can speak for himself, therefore (say they) 

ask him." 

Ver. 22. 

 

For theJews, &c. " But it was no evil to be put out of 

the synagogue," says S. Augustine, " for they expelled, but Christ 

received him." " But the parents said this, because they were less

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy0CJLzJo60_u2oUTTYD3xx8Kz2lykeqf1XtsNVvIh1tBIqXZz-kgPB3k-zzHhZZK47dZtndVcxFVEr_tKp_nlFq2I57kTtvqfo9K46u-_uMlIsbNi-HKQFIB1r_p6iZYR_a4KwvQ=w615-h900-v0

1fde2418-a336-46e2-aa1d-05f2573d2144

348 s. JOHN, c. IX. 

firm than their son, who stood forth as an intrepid witness of the 

truth," says Theophylact. 

Ver. 24.— Then again called they the man, &c. To give God the 

glory, is a form of obtestation or oath among the Jews (see Josh. vii. 

19). Confess that this man is a sinner, and so wilt thou by this 

confession of the truth give glory to God, who is the chief and eternal 

truth. " To give glory to God " (says the Gloss) " is to speak the 

truth as in the presence of God." They wished to persuade him 

under the pretext of religion (says S. Chrysostom), to deny that he 

was cured by Christ, or if he were, it was by magic and sleight of 

hand. "Deny," says the Interlinear Gloss, "the benefit thou hast 

received by Christ. But this were to blaspheme, and not to give 

glory to God." 

Whether He be a sinner. " He answers prudently and cautiously, 

neitherlaying himself open to the charge, nor yet concealingthetruth," 

says the Interlinear Gloss. But S. Chrysostom objects, "How was it 

that just before he called Him a Prophet, and now he says, ' Whether 

he be a sinner I know not ? 

' 

" He does not say this by way of asser-

tion, or through fear, but because he wished Jesus to be acquitted 

of the charges by the evidence of the fact. " I do not wish to 

argue the point with you. But I know for certain, that though once 

blind, now I see." 

How opened He thine eyes ? Just like hounds, says S. Chrysostom, 

who track their prey now here, now there. 

Wherefore would ye hear it again ? " Ye do not wish to learn, 

but merely to cavil," says S. Chrysostom. 

Willye also be His disciples ? " As I now see and envy not," says 

the Gloss, " nay, I profess myself to be Jesus' disciple, even so I 

wish you to become His disciples also." " He speaks thus," says 

S. Augustine, " as indignant at the hardness of the Jews, and as 

having been restored to sight, not enduring those who were blind 

(in heart)." Note here the heroic constancy and nobleness of the 

blind man in defending Jesus before the Pharisees, His sworn 

enemies. And hence he deserved to be taken up and exalted by 

Christ.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyStPfcpVCBPguqsdOnXOHuQxhs6IzjCTXi3hX_mcVOv5IuUs7qMg9HZjKmoWvVesaEcysuuwEHK6CBvBg2uy3g0K95MzCuMcmKlOPJ3mCdX1UmgHrRPKhERz_kHqJKrm2-MN8ulQ=w615-h900-v0

8e10c063-ffb8-4655-917d-e15447e2bb15

HOW FAR GOD HEARS SINNERS. 349 

Ver. 28. 

 

They then reviled him, &c. They cursed him, saying, 

Be thou accursed, or at all events heaped maledictions and 

reproaches upon him. But their curse was without effect, and was 

turned by Christ into a blessing. For it is an honour to the godly, 

to be cursed by the wicked. Whence S. Augustine says, " It is a 

curse if thou look into the heart of the speakers, but not if thou 

weighest the words themselves. May such a curse be on us, and 

on our children." 

But we know not this man whence he is, whether sent by God as 

was Moses, or by the devil. So Euthymius. 

Ver 30. 

 

The man answered, &c. It was your business, as doctors 

and learned in the Law, to know that Jesus, who works so many 

miracles, must have been sent by God only. For it is God who 

works miracles by Him. " He brings in everywhere the miracle of 

his recovery of sight," says S. Chrysostom, " because they could not 

gainsay that, but were convinced thereby." 

Ver. 31. Now we know, &c. How can this be ? For if sinners 

penitently ask pardon God vouchsafes it, and frequently bestows on 

sinners temporal blessings, and spiritual blessings also, if they ask 

for them. But I reply (1.) God ordinarily does not hear sinners 

; 

sinners, I mean, persisting in their sin. Yet sometimes, though 

rarely, He hears even them. So Jansen. This is plain from Scripture 

(seePs. lix. 1, 2; Prov. xxviii. 9; Ps. 1. 16; Mai. ii. 2). But of the 

just it is said, " The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and His 

ears are open to their prayers" (Ps. xxxii. 16). And, "The eyes of 

the Lord are on them that fear Him " (Ecclus. xv. 20). 

(2.) Secondly, and more befittingly to the case in point, He hears 

not sinners, so as to work miracles to establish their sanctity as He 

did by Jesus, to testify that He was the Messiah. So Maldonatus 

on this passage. (See also Suarez, torn. ii. de Relig., lib. de Orat. cap. 

xxv.) " God heareth not sinners if they pray with an evil intention," 

as e.g., to confirm their hypocrisy or lies. 

(3.) S. Augustine (De Bapt. contr. Don. iii. 20) replies that this 

blind man spoke only generally, being still a catechumen, and not 

yet sufficiently instructed in the Faith. For generally it is not true,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwQj7245LrOFgoQN1dfKmzy5HuwyUEvtsYA2lFi9aAZL-2BVsq2UZkCopwu0T-5S5r5P12W4UHixlYAcHn1K3hyorNuNUEizo72zBu5M7FrhnkNpr-w0Lkrgc6CQx_HjVwOohbxRQ=w615-h900-v0

4966505d-aa10-4a2e-8849-f10e48b8ddb5

35° S. JOHN, C IX. 

nor the view of Scripture, which in this plaae only states what was 

said by the blind man. 

Hear S. Augustine, " He speaks as one not yet anointed {i.e., a 

catechumen). For God does hear sinners also. For else the 

publican would say in vain, ' God be merciful to me, a sinner,' from 

which confession he obtained justification, as this blind man obtained 

enlightenment." 

From this passage S. Cyprian (Ep. lxiv. and Ixxx.) and the 

Donatists who followed his teaching inferred that Baptism by an 

heretical minister was invalid, and ought to be repeated ; because a 

heretic is a great sinner whom God hears not. But quite wrongly. 

For in like manner, Baptism administered by a Catholic Priest 

living in sin would be void, and would require to be repeated. I 

say therefore that the efficacy of the Sacrament is one thing, the 

efficacy of prayer is another. For a sacrament derives its efficacy 

ex opere operate, but prayer ex opere operantis, from the sanctity and 

character of him who prays. And therefore if a sinner (a heretic, 

e.g.) baptizes, this sacrament is valid, and derives its efficacy from 

the institution of Christ, who confers grace by the Sacrament. For 

Christ is the original author of Baptism, who baptizes by His 

ministers as by instruments. Besides, though God hears not the 

prayers of a sinner, as a private person, yet He hears the prayers 

of the same person, in his public capacity, because he is a minister 

of the Church. For the Church is holy, as having Christ as its 

holy Head, and as having many faithful and holy members, to whose 

prayers God hearkens. 

Ver. 32. 

 

Since the world began, &c. Granted that Moses and 

the Prophets wrought many miracles, yet they never restored sight 

to one who was born blind. Jesus who has restored my sight 

must needs be a greater Prophet than they. He retorted the 

words of the Pharisees on themselves, " Ye prefer Moses to Christ, 

but I prefer Christ. Ye choose to be Moses' disciples, I am 

Christ's." 

Ver. 33. If this man were not of God, He could do nothing, i.e., 

for curing my blindness. " He says this freely, stedfastly, and truly "

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxWYImBpGla12GrOGMXZutpWUeF-t5kXCUDrFcN7llHJREseco-2qZibqunpqnMWMeKIHqL5EYX4XeF9-uI30fwk6HpVTzSjfleHQT0-vZR8KmtYZPVxbUt5xCqUOO2hl5DbwZz6A=w615-h900-v0

090fa662-d21a-4d37-a657-29ea5a01129c

PRIDE OF THE PHARISEES. 35 

 

(S. Augustine), "for to enlighten the blind is supernatural work, 

and specially belongs to God." 

Ver. 34. 

 

They answered, &c, in sins, both in mind and body, for 

thou wast born blind by reason of thy sin. For they held the tenet 

of Pythagoras that the soul existed before the body, and that it was 

in consequence of its sins thrust down into a deformed (i.e., a blind) 

body. So Cyril, Leontius, and others. Maldonatus explains, " Thou 

hast done nothing but sin from thy birth." So S. Chrysostom and 

Theophylact. And dost thou teach us? Thou blind sinner, wilt 

thou teach us who have our sight, and are wise and righteous ? 

And they cast him out of the private house in which they were, as 

not deserving to be disputed with by such just teachers, says 

Maldonatus. Or out of the temple, as says S. Chrysostom, and 

consequently out of the synagogue, adds Leontius. That is, they 

excommunicated him. " But the Lord of the temple found him," 

says Chrysostom, " and took him up." Both statements are credible : 

that they drove him out of the house, and also excommunicated him, 

for this latter they had decided to do. As if they said, " Begone, 

thou apostate, and go to thine own Jesus." But this leads us to 

suppose that all this took place in the House of Judgment, a public 

place (see on verse 31). And that he was expelled from the syna-

gogue appears more plainly from our Lord's own words in the next 

chapter, / am the door. 

Ver. 35. 

 

-Jesus heard that they had cast him out, &c. Christ 

received him kindly, and rewards his constancy. Having given 

sight to his body, He now enlightens his mind. In giving him 

bodily sight, He had cast in some scattered seeds of faith, which He 

now particularly forms into perfect shape : so as to make him 

believe, that He whom he looked upon as a mere prophet, for 

having given him sight, was God also, and the Son of God. The 

Gloss says, " The blind man had already a heart prepared to believe, 

but knew not in whom he had to believe." This, in answer to his 

question, he learns from Christ. 

Christ took trouble to find him in the place, where He knew he 

was. It is the part of a good shepherd to seek for a wandering

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyx2u3YYWuyfGCDwxusniEdQqYilEOl6PVcWzUoh110MD84vuPslWVfJVFRmVJst10stWW2rYoPTJ_rRFqvczmfiD1k3NOwXJo_ts8kl9k74X_dN1v1eL2cCqA48hVcPxYkLyD-3g=w615-h900-v0

0c06c3b5-191b-41e3-a4c3-2ecaaebcae59

352 S. JOHN, C. IX. 

sheep, who cannot by itself come back into the right way. " They 

expel," says S. Augustine {in loc), " the Lord receives, and he becomes 

a Christian, even the more because he was expelled." 

Believest thou i Christ did not demand faith from the blind man 

for the healing of his body, but He does for the healing of his soul 

 

for, as S. Augustine says (Serm. xv. de Verb. Apost.), " He who 

made thee without thyself, doth not justify thee without thyself: 

He made thee without thy knowledge, He justifies thee through 

thy will." 

Ver. 37.—AndJesus said, &c. Thou seest him now for the first 

time, for he had been healed in the pool of Siloam, when Christ 

was not there. Christ therefore points out to him that it was He 

who restored his sight. He recalls his healing to his remembrance, 

says Theophylact, and that he had received the gift of sight from 

Him, so as to make him believe that He was not only the Son of 

man, but the Son of God. 

Ver. 38. 

 

And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped Him, 

as the Son of God, and very God, to be worshipped as God with the 

worship due to Him {latrid). Moreover, the blind man, inwardly 

enlightened (and moved to it by Christ), by saying, " I believe," 

brought out acts of hope, contrition, charity, devotion, and adoration 

towards Christ, and was by them cleansed from his sins and justified. 

He consequently became a holy and apostolic man. He was said 

to have been one of the seventy disciples, and to have become 

Bishop of Aix, in Provence, where he died and was buried by the 

side of Maximinus, to whom he had been coadjutor (see Peter de 

Natalis in Cat. Sanctorum, lib. v. cap. 102). 

Ver. 39. AndJesus said (not to him but to the Pharisees), for 

judgment, &c. " That is for condemnation," says S. Cyril, " to convict 

and condemn the proud and worldly Pharisees of blindness who 

seem in their own sight to be wise." 

But others explain it better, not of condemnation, but of inquiry 

and discrimination. I have come into the world to discriminate 

and separate believers from unbelievers, good from evil, godly from 

ungodly ; in order that the people, who before had lived in ignor-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyB30RpLe9R7JAepYA850yTgRdfY9UesH66Itrr-5bn7U7NTpET7ty3iKU_BZ30yBxUba5VtPqDfYolHv0nWyqhPK1n2Yd9xZaDOtTODhXRoB2HElKKt1kLQnfNIyxbQfnsfoZQEw=w615-h900-v0

d3aabe9f-a8e0-4c28-a7bf-0987618a3d15

SECRET COUNSEL OF GOD. 353 

ance of God and of salvation, and in darkness of mind, like this 

blind man, might by believing in Me be enlightened with the know-

ledge of God, and of things which concern their salvation ; and that 

I might suffer the proud who refuse to believe in Me (like the 

Pharisees who are puffed up by their knowledge of the law) to be 

blinded, and might convict them of their blindness. 

(2.) ~B\\tjudgment might possibly here mean the secret counsel and 

mysterious decree of God, determined and fixed by His righteous 

decree, whereby God ordained that the Gentiles who knew not God, 

and consequently were blind, might behold the Light of Faith in 

Christ, and humbly and eagerly accept it ; while the Scribes and 

Pharisees and wise men of the world, puffed up by their own know-

ledge, might become darkened in unbelief, and reject the faith and 

enlightenment of Christ. Humility, therefore, enlightened by faith 

the unlearned Gentiles, who submitted themselves to Christ, while 

pride darkened with unbelief the learned Scribes who rejected Him. 

So S. Cyril, or rather Clictoveus, who filled up what was wanting in 

his commentary. (See Rom. xi. 33.) " His judgments are a great 

deep." Theodoret applies this to Paul and Judas. For S. Paul 

having been blind received his sight, and Judas, after seeing, became 

blind. The words "that," "therefore," &c, frequently signify not 

the cause, but the result or consequence. For Christ came not in 

order that the Scribes should be made blind ; but their blindness 

was a result of Christ's preaching, not from anything on His part, 

but from their own pride and fault. So Cyril and others. 

Ver. 40.—And some of the Pharisees, &c. The Pharisees felt 

themselves sharply touched by our Lord's words, which they under-

stood to speak not of the blindness of the body, but of the mind. 

They knew that they were not bodily blind, and therefore if He had 

said this, they would have hooted Him down as a fool. They said, 

Are we blind also ? Hast thou come to give sight to those who are 

blind in body, and to make out that we who spiritually see, and are 

doctors of the law, are blind and foolish ? Show us our blindness 

and foolishness. 

Ver. 41.—Jesus said to them, &c. (1.) S. Chrysostom, Theophy-

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxv9GpxgmqIB16AzZxnR6zLKgk11Xr0g80v0OV-FNKz_Xd_Mu64NC1yI480ZZG7zWHvF-Gs6EAxdaDQnYTbKHmjl2JI06opDPZh9hNov08T6smbmEJmwY7YSqVvyUyJYUAhFfVp=w615-h900-v0

a1127e85-fd6c-4b02-966d-329413405578

354 S. JOHN, C. IX. 

lact, and Euthymius explain this of bodily blindness; meaning, If ye 

were blind in your bodies, ye would be less proud and sinful. For 

bodily blindness would humble your mind. (2.) S. Augustine (in 

loc.) is more to the point. If ye were blind in your own opinion, 

if ye would acknowledge yourselves to be blind (i.e., ignorant and 

foolish) in things which concern your salvation, ye would not have 

sin, for ye would seek a remedy for it, and would obtain it 

from Me. 

(3.) Accurately and scholastically, If ye were blind through ignor-

ance of Scripture and the law of nature, ye would not have sin, by 

acting according to this ignorance and not acknowledging Me as your 

Messiah. That is to say, If your ignorance were clearly without 

blame and invincible, ye would have some sin, but one which was 

less serious, and more excusable, and therefore ye might easily be 

enlightened and cured by Me, since My doctrine would dispel your 

ignorance. But now ye say to yourselves, "We see," that is, ye 

think ye see, and are so wise as to be excellent judges of Christ's 

advent and person. And therefore ye from your arrogant and evil 

thoughts continue in the sin of unbelief against Me 

; ye obstinately 

set your mind against Me, and thus refuse to believe in Me as the 

Messiah, though I have demonstrated that I am by very many signs 

and miracles. And therefore, ye cannot by any possibility be 

enlightened and healed by Me, because ye obstinately refuse to hear 

Me. So Jansen and others.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwANv0xGK_T0EgJfrU-L4SLs6y-NphDQwfzFPZs_dzgPcC4XOhXg_3vxaJptW8F0CC4BJhobo4OEFLYpz270Yc2KOl6TjX7d8hsVNX4xEZdWz3hz7IR-jrUW3gcB2S6wTKc2IUu=w615-h900-v0

02ad6967-e83b-4159-8b58-3c70534a71f0

( 355 ) 

CHAPTER X. 

(l ) Christ utters two parables concerning Himself, one of the door, the other of the 

Shepherd of the Sheep, and refers both of them to Himself. He says (ver. 7), 

I am the door, and (ver. 11) 1 am the Good Shepherd. (2.) The Jews who were 

disputing among themselves about Jesus (ver, 9) ask Him to sayplainly whether 

He were the Messiah. He replied that He was, but that the Jews would not 

acknowledge it, as not being His sheep. (3.) The Jews {ver. 31) take up stones to 

cast at Him. He defends Himself by quoting Ps. Ixxxii., ' I saidye are gods' 

And when the Jews wished to take Him, He escaped out of their sight. 

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the 

sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a 

robber. 

2 But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 

3 To him the porter openeth ; and the sheep hear his voice : and he calleth his 

own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. 

4 And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the 

sheep follow him : for they know his voice. 

5 And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him : for they know 

not the voice of strangers. 

6 This parable spake Jesus unto them : but they understood not what things 

they were which he spake unto them. 

7 Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the 

door of the sheep. 

8 All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers : but the sheep did not 

hear them. 

9 I am the door : by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in 

and out, and find pasture. 

10 The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy : I am come 

that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. 

ill am the good shepherd : the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. 

12 But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are 

not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth : and the wolf 

catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. 

13 The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the 

sheep. 

14 I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. 

15 As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father : and I lay down my 

life for the sheep.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyCQIZbuMVl9l2eQwBNaVNl3ws5juJ7DU9GJ4-pJijYy_jP6HGSjehJlOHMYG-OYJUAxwhsewikKzZfPTJzjJKmy33ENtR_hwNXJgdV9oEeWKAiSKy3Pu8rIzZByJ2CIUGPF4tq=w615-h900-v0

46a2793e-6870-4042-ade1-2428236f6fd3

356 S. JOHN, c. X. 

16 And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold : them also I must bring, 

and they shall hear my voice ; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. 

17 Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I 

might take it again. 

18 No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to 

lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I re-

ceived of my Father. 

19 IT There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. 

20 And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad ; why hear ye him ? 

21 Others said, These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil 

open the eyes of the blind ? 

22 IT And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter. 

23 And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. 

24 Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long dost 

thou make us to doubt ? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. 

25 Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not : the works that I do 

in my Father's name, they bear witness of me. 

26 But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. 

27 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me : 

28 And I give unto them eternal life ; and they shall never perish, neither shall 

any man pluck them out of my hand. 

29 My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all ; and no matt is able to 

pluck them out of my Father's hand. 

30 I and my Father are one. 

31 Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 

32 Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father 

; 

for which of those works do you stone me? 

33 The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not, but 

for blasphemy ; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. 

34 Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? 

35 If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture 

cannot be broken ; 

36 Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, 

Thou blasphemest ; because I said, I am the Son of God ? 

37 If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. 

38 But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works : that ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. 

39 Therefore they sought again to take him : but he escaped out of their hand, 

40 And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first 

baptized ; and there he abode. 

41 And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle : but all things 

that John spake of this man were true. 

42 And many believed on him there. 

Ver. 1.—-Verily, verily (that is in truth, most truly and most 

assuredly), / say unto you, He thatentereih not, &c. He puts forth this 

parable to show who He is, and who are His rivals and adversaries. 

The occasion for it was because the Pharisees had cast out of the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzASipLXp3DWQwqGZgW8tNNiazqCi3FGWiN_LUegYTOORitR_NGhPgzB6kORBabMagmj8GWCnSuSnUOzIp31WLx-Y3t-F5Q6Mep0MORRMrvi4BLzjjMYP3VinuUls-l85oVIMBw=w615-h900-v0

2fcac0ba-e85a-42ed-83c6-9cf05aa085db

THE SHEEPFOLD THE CHURCH. 357 

synagogue for his confession of Christ the blind man whom He had 

healed. By doing this they signified that Jesus was not the Messiah, 

but a false prophet ; and consequently that they who believed in 

Him, as the blind man who had been cured did, erred in their 

belief, and wandered away from the synagogue, and were apostates 

from their own Church. Christ therefore puts forth the parable of 

the door of the sheepfold ; to show by it, that so far from His being 

a false prophet, all others who enter not by Him as the door of the 

sheepfold into the Church of God, are deceivers and counterfeits. 

And that consequently the synagogue of the Pharisees was not the 

synagogue of God, but of Satan. Whereas the true Church of God 

is the Christian Church which Christ founded and substituted for the 

Jewish Church, and consequently the biind man when excommuni-

cated from the synagogue, entered by faith in Christ into the true, 

i.e., the Christian Church. 

In order that the reader may easily comprehend the whole 

parable, I will here give a summary of it. (1.) The sheepfold is the 

Church of God. (2.) The owner is God the Father. (3.) The door 

is Christ, or faith in Him, who is inclosed by the Scriptures of the 

Law and the Prophets as by a door firm-fastened with its bolts. 

(4.) The porter is the Holy Spirit. (5.) The sheep are not merely 

the predestinated, as S. Augustine held, but all the faithful that are 

within the Church. (6.) The true Pastors and Prelates are those who 

enter through Christ. (7.) To these the porter, i.e., the Holy 

Spirit, openeth, because faith in Christ, by the which they enter, is 

the gift of the Holy Spirit. And the Holy Spirit gives them true 

and lawful power, so that what they do is ratified by God. (8.) They 

lead out the sheep, i.e., the faithful, into the pastures of sound 

doctrine, grace, and virtues, go before them by their own example of 

a good life, and call them by their names, because they have a care 

for them severally, and exhort, stimulate, and compel them one by 

one to better things. (9.) He who enters not into the sheepfold 

through Christ, but by leaping over the wall, or breaking through a 

window or wall, is a thief and robber of the sheep, that is, of the 

faithful : for he is busy in killing and destroying them. The other

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzVRyuTTk9V_6A9vGUrhwBhe8jVN6PWo7kkK-i5sr1yJnAJfFNqC3VD2NIVBwSY7SPwajv4xRDgJ20Ttiqi6OpUyWTmQ3JNjOBnwcpVDkVkXscLAmfetFFH5YPyWRvsMltE0744nA=w615-h900-v0

88ab7736-e325-43cf-bd87-f1d793f8dc1d

358 S. JOHN, c. X. 

matters are mere ornamental additions, and are not to be applied 

in illustration of the subject. 

Let us consider these points one by one, and review them again. 

He that entereth not by the door, &c. Such were Judas of Galilee 

and Theudas (Acts v. 36, 37), and others who pretended that 

they were the Messiah, or endeavoured to arrogate to themselves 

that which specially belonged to the Messiah. And such, too, the 

Scribes and Pharisees were beginning to be, who before this had 

received legitimate authority from God through the merits of Christ, 

to teach and govern His people; and were therefore His true 

Pastors and Teachers. But by opposing themselves to Christ, now 

present among them, and by turning away the people from Him, 

they became wolves, nay thieves and robbers of the faithful. So S. 

Augustine, and from him the Gloss. Against the arrogance of the 

Pharisees, who boasted they could see, He brings forward this 

similitude, which shows that neither wisdom nor a good life can 

avail aught except through Him. And S. Chrysostom says : " By the 

phrase, another way, He signifies the Scribes who taught the 

doctrines and commandments of men, and transgressed the law." 

Such were the false prophets of old, and heretics now, of whom 

Jeremiah writes (xxiii. 21). Hear S. Augustine, "Let pagans, or 

heretics, or Jews say, ' We live well 

; 

' if they enter not by the door, 

what does it profit them ? And they are to be said not to live well 

who either know not the end of good living through blindness, or 

else contemn it through pride of heart." 

Tropologically ;—S. Augustine, " Lowly is the door, even Christ. 

He who enters by this door must needs be humble, in order that 

he may be able to enter without hurting his head by striking it 

against the lintel. But he who humbleth not himself, but wishes 

to climb up by the wall, is exalted only that he may fall." And 

the same S. Augustine (Serm. xlix., de Verb. Dom.) says, " He enters by the door who imitates Christ and His humility. He is a 

'thief who strives to steal away the sheep from Christ, and claim 

them for himself. He is also a ' robber,' because he kills the souls 

of the faithful, and hands them over to hell." And so S. Augustine

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyu-DrYSVJrBqnKhys0GPPhZgTIEhDNZzsGLWjd5YXyWidyE7UD1PcSXbXAh5k9UIlkDZXFnylqt3WtepDajU3Ytt3NFqCvP5uXgRxvYEKKMjwLEVs0QVm9eBc3Ix2q6-mA8umYNA=w615-h900-v0

29256af2-adda-4183-b4f5-46256399e3cd

WAYS OF GAINING BENEFICES. 359 

(in loc), " He is a thief who calls ' his own ' that which is another's." 

" By making the sheep of God his own," says the Gloss. " He is 

a 'robber' because he kills what he has stolen," says S. Augustine. 

Tropologically ;—Salmeron says humorously (Tract, p. 88), " Men enter ecclesiastical benefices by various means. (1.) By the royal 

gate, courtiers as recommended by great men. (2.) By the golden 

gate. (3.) By the gate of consanguinity. (4.) By the gate of gifts 

(simony). (5.) By the gate of doing service, those who by their 

obsequiousness are promoted by bishops to benefices. They lie 

in sickness and wait for the moving of the waters, that is for the 

vacant post. For he who is first gains favour with the successor, 

and obtains the benefice." 

Ver. 2. 

 

But he that entereth, &c. By the door S. Chrysostom 

understands the Holy Scriptures. " For these," he says, "lay open 

the knowledge of God, protect the sheep, drive away wolves, by pre-

cluding access to heretics." So also Theophylact, Leontius, and 

Euthymius. And also Theodorus of Heraclea (in Cat.), who gives 

also a further reason. "Scripture is the door, because he is a 

true pastor to whom the door gives ingress, that is on whom Scrip-

ture confers authority, and thus secures his acceptance." Other 

fathers regard Christ as the door, as He Himself says expressly. 

But you will say, Christ is the shepherd of the sheep, therefore He 

cannot be a door. For the shepherd enters by the door, therefore 

He cannot Himself be the door. S. Augustine replies; "The Lord 

Himself is the pastor and the door. He opens Himself who 

expounds Himself, and the porter is the Holy Spirit, of whom the 

Lord says, ' He will teach you all truth.' Christ therefore, who is 

the truth, is the door, and He who teacheth the truth openeth the 

door." And the Gloss says, " All who hold and teach the truth are 

one shepherd in Christ the Shepherd." Christ retained for Himself 

alone the name of door, for the sheep to enter in to God. But the 

shepherd entereth the door. For Christ Himself and other preachers 

preach Christ. But you may say more simply with Maldonatus, 

that Christ the shepherd enters by the door, i.e., by Himself, into 

the Church, because He enters by His own authority, but others

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxY9x_FBLLGV9ih5jEHgz-rIobaloYTVZzfOwyMwURIOcE8GomxmK5G-vQ_yz6IE4MtUOkYfAfKspXv3OJ2t5M5TIYMur_lL30CUStAMPV2cCH3xP9X4FStaWjAmfOeY5Wg1XaHgg=w615-h900-v0

b83706b5-8467-4a58-9025-2107f7a1118d

i,6o S. JOHN, c. X. 

by authority derived from Him. But it is not possible in a parable 

to make all expressions fit in exactly. Moreover, Syrians and 

Hebrews delight in parables, heaping them up one on another, and 

running them into each other. As Christ in this place mixes up 

the similies of the door and the shepherd. 

Ver. 3.— To him the porter openeth. (1.) That is Moses, as bearing 

testimony to Christ, says S. Chrysostom and others. (See chap. v. 46.) 

(2.) S. Cyril thinks that it means the angel who presides over the 

whole Church (S. Michael, as is supposed). (3.) The genuine 

meaning (according to S. Augustine, Chrysostom, and many others) 

is, that it means the Holy Ghost, "for the Scriptures opened 

by Him point out Christ as the Shepherd," says Theophylact. 

Or rather the Holy Ghost opened a door for Christ into the Church, 

when He constituted Him the Pastor of the Church, confirmed His 

authority by His testimony, His grace, and miracles, as when He 

descended on Him in the form of a dove at His baptism, and after-

wards through Him gave sight to the blind, healed the sick, and 

raised the dead. And He also places over the Church all other 

Pastors whatsoever, the lawful successors of Christ, and causes them 

to be acknowledged and accepted, and by them brings in all the 

other faithful into the Church. He also exposes the frauds of 

heretics, and causes them to be expelled from the Church. 

And the sheep hear his voice. Just as sheep when they hear the 

call of the shepherd, so do Christian people acknowledge the true 

pastor (and those whom He substitutes as His deputies), listen to 

His voice, and follow Him in all things. S. Augustine, and Bede 

after him, understand by the sheep only the predestinated, for they 

are called sheep, and are distinguished from the goats (Matt, xxiii. 33). 

But this relates to the judgment when the elect and saved are 

separated from the reprobate But the present passage relates to 

the Church militant, where the elect are mingled with the reprobate, 

and cannot be separated. Both then are called sheep. The sheep 

then are all the faithful. For they are all of them in the Church, 

and acknowledge, love, and worship Christ as their Shepherd. 

And calleth His own sheep by name, i.e., one by one. For the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwRi92YcT3J3vbNSP-a6MUVOoxe1fSdGFbpEuXy56okTqyEbSJoTiU_KJAPWjvSn-IY1k-m-6Aggf22KXktTnNiJbxk0U2xihIyDkH2w6wM8sVPwdPA3-2QMHcNslXOR_XXvRw3iw=w615-h900-v0

948cfa73-0841-4021-b497-01bed30d91de

MARKS OF A TRUE PASTOR. 361 

shepherd looks after them singly, and calls them, both in a body 

and separately, to follow Him to the pasture. And if any of them 

be sick He takes it out by itself, gives remedies, and if necessary 

carries it on His shoulders. Moreover, skilful shepherds commonly 

give names to their sheep and other animals, and call to them by 

their names. And in like manner Christ and every pastor give 

names to Christians at their baptism, and call them by them. He 

also takes care of them one by one, so as to feed them by His ex-

ample and the Holy Sacraments, and thus leads them to salvation 

and heavenly glory. 

Leontius observes that Christ here sets forth eight signs and 

duties of a true pastor ; that he enters by the door, that the Porter 

opens to him, that he can address his sheep by their several 

names, that he leads forth his sheep, that he goes before them, 

that his sheep follow him, and that he lays down his life for the 

sheep. Such was S. Chrysostom, who, speaking on his banishment, 

thus addresses his people {Horn, xi.), "Ye are my father, ye are my 

mother, ye are my life, ye are my grace. If ye make progress, I am 

delighted. Ye are my crown, my riches, my treasure. I am pre-

pared to be offered a thousand times for you ; nor need you thank me 

for this. I am only discharging a debt. For a good pastor ought 

to lay down his life for his sheep. For to such an one death brings 

immortal life." 

And leads them forth to the pastures, which are not without, but 

within the fold, that is in the Church itself. For in the Church the 

pastor teaches the people, celebrates Mass, baptizes, administers 

the Sacraments, &c. Besides, the Church is the assembly of the 

faithful, and therefore where the faithful are there also is the Church, 

or a part thereof. 

Ver. 4. 

 

And when he leadeth forth his sheep (to the pastures) he 

goeth before them, to lead the way, to defend them from the wolf and 

the spoiler, and to lead those that follow him by a direct and con-

venient road to better pastures. And so in like manner Christ and 

every true pastor (1) go before the faithful in their way to heaven 

by the example of a holy life. Let a pastor therefore consider

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzwY2Qg4XwyJaB0BPUDWfF-iiMXva_3QrOmajRHUsVXs1QvE06SGEfComtBCSrk_fWJLv7YeUKL6RBKsIZ9ejDAf1OCMhgauoWlR-KZBNhMU8NWcwhKMGDaO-zcluJ8dTNb8UfSPQ=w615-h900-v0

88ac773e-0cf8-4f49-a5cd-60ef0cee6041

362 S. JOHN, C. X. 

that lie ought to be the leader and guide of the faithful in sanctity, 

to surpass them all, to give to all a bright pattern of virtues, so that 

looking on him, they may follow him to greater heights, as S. Peter 

says (1 Epist. chap. v. 3). (2.) A pastor by his vigilance and 

energy protects the faithful from heretics, scandals, and other evils. 

(3.) He points out the straight way to heaven, and feeds and nurtures 

them with the best advice he can. 

Anagogically. St. Augustine says, He who went before the 

sheep is He who being raised from the dead, dieth no more, and 

who said to the Father, "I will that they also whom Thou hast 

given Me, be with Me where I am " (John xvii. 24). 

And the sheepfollow him, for they know his voice. They distinguish 

his voice from that of others, and therefore follow it. 

Ver. 5. 

 

But a stranger will they not follow, for they know not the 

voice ofstrangers, i.e., of heretics, Jews, heathen, and all wicked and 

deceitful men, for the genuine sheep of Christ fly from them as 

from wolves. 

Ver. 6. This parable spakeJesus unto them, but they knew not what 

things they were which he spake unto them. In the Greek ^agoi/Jan, 

a similitude, proverb. (See note on Prov. i. 5.) The Pharisees and 

Jews, against whom He launched it (and the apostles also), did not 

understand it, as being involved and obscure. 

Ver. 7. Then saidJesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto 

you, I am the door of the sheep. Maldonatus thinks that Christ here 

speaks of two doors, the door of the house, i.e., Holy Scriptures, 

and the door of the sheepfold, which is Christ. He believes that 

the word door is used in two senses, one by which the shepherds 

themselves, and the other by which the sheep enter. But this dis-

tinction is more subtil than solid. For Christ speaks in both cases 

of one and the same door, that is of the sheepfold. What He said 

obscurely and parabolically (ver. 1) He explained in the parable. 

"He opened," says S. Augustine, "that which was closed. He 

is the door. Let us enter that we may rejoice in having so done." 

This distinction evades indeed one difficulty, i.e., how Christ enters 

as a shepherd through the door ; that is, how He enters the door of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzpeindqC7b926m2wb77hZnsEpLL2S6zc7Js-9__q9akmkKs1HJ-X0OT_DFZZgmaAopgry1ET-E3LITtLy6PuqzScgyHvltPWJY2dIxPSAmqyeZ4AT5G04_7UM-A9AmZcYfTClq3A=w615-h900-v0

4487da85-dd03-4a34-a311-088764703ca1

3^4 S. JOHN, c. X. 

Ver. g.~/ am the door, &c. Rupertus thinks that this relates to 

a different door and a different sheepfold from the other, according 

to what is said (ver. 16), "Other sheep I have," &c. But there ia 

only one fold of Christ; one Church, that is. As He subjoins, 

" There shall be one fold and one shepherd." The meaning of the 

door already spoken of, Christ partly confirms, partly explains 

when He adds, " By Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved." 

That is, if any man believe in Me, and therefore through faith in 

Me and by My grace enters the Church, " he shall be saved," i.e., 

shall be justified and blessed, if he continues, that is, in My faith, 

grace and charity even unto death. So S. Gregory (Epist. lib. vii. 

49). " He enters through the door into the sheepfold who enters 

through Christ. But he enters through Christ who believes and 

teaches the truth concerning Him—the Creator and Redeemer of 

mankind, and abides by what he preached." 

And will go in and out. Will go out to the pastures, and after 

having fed will return to the resting-place, as sheep do. For the 

faithful will, when well fed, enter the fold of the Church, and again 

when hungry will go forth to the pastures of the soul, without any 

peril, for I will guide them to and fro. So Maldonatus. 

But to go in and out signifies among the Hebrews to act with 

freedom, do one's own work, &c, and is connected with what 

follows. It means, the faithful man will move about everywhere 

without fear ; will do his duty, and whatever he does, whether at 

home or abroad, will everywhere find food for his soul. The phrase 

denotes security, confidence, and freedom of converse ; and of 

doing everything, everywhere, for and through Christ. So Cyril, 

Chrysostom. 

Symbolically and tropologically, S. Gregory {Horn, xiv.) " The 

faithful withdraws within himself by contemplation, and comes forth 

in action to do good works." " He will enter in," says S. Augustine, 

"for inward meditation, he will go forth for outward action." The 

author of Be spiritu et anima, says, " He will enter within to con-

template My Godhead, he will go forth to contemplate My Man-

hood, and in either case will find wondrous pastures." And in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzM3ZaZAiAJJfd8jaS95EwKk_D4wTkgO1o8pOmsXBr4g13bSSaEGbHhfIk1zDgpwS015LGjduRxhZrQoaM6Ed6DgZ2Fxonutfs31Ukj7z3pkKWOipL-G_SuIgzzg5fifzOUeWWUcA=w615-h900-v0

f51e9edc-a383-4ae5-bdb7-5e18afeaf863

WHO IS A THIEF. 36 5 

another place S. Gregory writes, " Within, they have the pastures of 

contemplation ; without, the pastures of good works ; inwardly they 

enrich their mind with devotions, outwardly they satiate themselves 

with good works." And lastly, Theophylact says, " He will enter 

in who has a care for the inward man ; he will go out who mortifies 

his members upon earth." 

Anagogically, Rupertus says, "He enters the Church by faith, 

to find therein pastures ; he will go out when at death he migrates 

therefrom into heaven." "He enters," says S. Augustine 

i 

"into 

the Church through the door of faith, and goes forth through the 

same door of living faith into eternal life, where he will find 

pasture." And S. Gregory, " He will enter into faith, he will go 

forth to hope, and will find pasture in eternal satiety." 

Ver. 10. 

 

The thief cometh not, &c. He shows what is the end 

and aim of him whom before He called a thief, and what on the 

contrary was His own. The thief and robber of the sheep,—as for 

instance a heretic or schismatic, a Scribe or Pharisee, or especially 

a false-Christ,—comes to carry off the sheep (i.e., the faithful) from 

God and the Church, whose property they are, to hand them over 

to the synagogue of Satan, and there kill them by heresy and sin, 

and cast them into hell. But I who am the true Shepherd of the 

sheep (i.e., of the faithful) came down from heaven, not for My 

own sake, but for that of the faithful, that being freed by Me, they 

may have the life of grace, even yet more abundantly. The word 

irioiaeh may be taken either as an adverb (abundantly), or as an adjec-

tive (abundant), that is, surpassing, exceeding all measure, that is, 

that they may abound in My doctrine and grace, and may live 

thereby, quick in spirit, enriched with spiritual gifts both in this 

world by grace, and in the world to come by glory. So S. Cyril 

and others. Rupertus adds, " that Christians may have more abun-

dant grace than the Jews under the old law." This abounding life 

of the spirit, inspired by Christ, you may see in S. Peter and the 

other Apostles, in Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, &c. Hence the 

glowing language of S. Paul, " Who shall separate us from the love 

of Christ," &c. (Rom. viii.)

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwLQSNqh4sQas0eTmYMflNj3WR2FGVD1XM-_lt_mAxlestUqbEdrTtTKaVjvFIPQHYGqQ-tGOsmbOBb-ZgZI8ZhukB3xWNuPpkQxgvaPSTn6pDDgNFpigJeG36TDvkvPD1vFqO_dw=w615-h900-v0

7912d7d8-d024-4d26-bede-0f25228eb5b9

THE PROPHETS PRECURSORS OF CHRIST. 363 

the Church by Scripture witnessing to Him. But it does not escape 

the other difficulty—how the same person is both the shepherd and 

the door. We must say, therefore, that He united together two 

parables (as was said above, ver. 2). For Christ intended to 

teach two things. First, that no one could enter into the Church, 

and afterwards into heaven, that is be justified and sanctified, except 

through Him. This He shows by the parable of the door. For as 

there is no ingress into the fold except through the door, so there 

is no entrance into the Church, militant and triumphant, except 

through Christ ; and secondly, that He is the true Shepherd, as 

laying down His life for the sheep; but that the others were hirelings, 

whom the sheep ought not to follow. This He sets forth by the 

parable of the shepherd. But because this latter subject is con-

nected with the former, He mixes up the two parables together. 

Ver. 8.—All that ever came before me were thieves and robbers. What 

then ! were all the prophets thieves and robbers? S. Augustine {con-

tra Faustum, xvi. 12, and S. Jerome, lib. ii. contra Pelag.) replies that 

the prophets came not of their own accord, but were sent by God. 

And again they were not sent in addition to Christ, but with Christ, 

as His precursors, and announcing His advent. They were there-

fore not contrary to Christ, but counted as one with Him, as having 

come for His sake, and by His order and guidance. " They came 

with the Word of God. He sent them as the heralds of Him who 

was to come, and He possessed the hearts of those whom He had 

sent." Euthymius adds, "They came indeed before Christ, but they 

entered through the door." He speaks specially of those impostors 

who claimed to be the long-expected Messiah. They were thieves 

and robbers, such as Judas of Galilee, Theudas, and afterwards 

Simon Magus, Barchochebas, and many others, who claimed for 

themselves the name and title of the Christ. So S. Cyril, Chrysos-

tom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and others. 

But the sheep did not hear them. Because they discovered that 

they did not bring the token of the Messiah, as predicted by the 

prophets, but wished to steal away the faithful from Christ, to 

claim them for themselves, and to cast them into hell.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx3tBL-g-Fste8nFeW9F8fAaTEPp9wCj0Ld0cOM50fPTknOz9hd7Lp_dfx4Adn50Ls9CcCjSa531YzGzOZkNwUGFkzANdb5oElBGwq-amYDFTQ3rB6USj3g4Gh8kLDCmsdY1d6o=w615-h900-v0

bcbc4aa1-53f4-4af2-8777-01cbd092663b

366 S. JOHN, c. X. 

Ver. ii.—lam the good Shepherd, &c. I, the one only Prince of 

Shepherds, who will lay down My life for My sheep, to redeem them 

by My death from death, and confer on them both present and 

eternal life. Neither prophets, nor apostles, nor any one else could 

do this. For though they were slain for the sake of the faithful, yet 

they did not redeem them, sanctify, or beatify them. So Rupertus, 

Chrysostom, &c. S. Augustine adds that the prophets and 

apostles are counted as one and the same shepherd with Christ, as 

being under Him, sent also and guided and protected by Him. 

Christ therefore is that special and singular Pastor foretold by Ezekiel 

xxxiv. 23. (See notes in loc.) 

Christ passes from the parable of the door to the more striking 

parable of the Shepherd. He is the door by which the sheep enter, 

and also the Shepherd of the sheep : that is not any ordinary one, 

but the chief, special, and Divine Shepherd. And He enters through 

the door, that is, by Himself and His own authority. 

Besides this Christ rejoices in the title of Shepherd, as being most 

appropriate and most sweet. He used to be thus represented in 

very ancient pictures, at Rome, as carrying a sheep on His 

shoulders. Many of the patriarchs, who were types and ancestors 

of Christ, were shepherds, learning thereby (says Philo) to be shep-

herds of men, &c. " If therefore thou wishest to know and to dis-

charge the office of a true Pastor, see how a shepherd treats his 

sheep. Be so eminent in doctrine and sanctity among thy faithful 

ones, as to appear like a rational pastor among the irrational sheep, 

and as an angel among men " (S. Chrysostom). He attends to his 

sheep one by one ; let him lead them into richer pastures. He 

goes before them by his virtuous example, as S. Paul exhorts Titus 

(Tit. ii. 7). As a parish priest he drives away all heretics and hurtful 

persons. And let him feed his flock with sound doctrines and 

sacraments, and not fatten himself on the milk of his flock (Ezek. 

xxxiv. 2). Let him not be mercenary, seeking his own profit, paying 

court to the well-to-do and noble, and despising the rustics and 

mean of his flock. For Christ went about villages and towns, 

preaching the Gospel to the poor (Matt, ii.) Fisher, Bishop of

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy4f0avmLWQhfXUgM5y872D4E9E4e68F0uTprDBp_rqg3ujYJR3Bj32jAdUu7FHlzbFJb6Ktgt4cgyiRX7ZN7KlSfj6MN-c3JgNjr_bo0oYkFmvAV_MwzmXz0kY44pLE5KKmntXow=w615-h900-v0

d30122f6-e43d-46bd-95bc-c2ddeab7307a

EXAMPLE OF BISHOP FISHER. 367 

Rochester, was a noble example of this ; he refused to exchange his 

poor bishoprick for a wealthier one, saying that he could render a 

better account at the day of judgment for his few sheep and small 

gains than he could for greater ones. For he said, " If men did but 

know how exact an account would be required, they would not seek 

to obtain great and wealthy bishoprics " (Sanders in Schism. Angl.) 

A good shepherd tenderly feeds and fosters the lambs and 

delicate ones of his flock (see Ezek. xxxiv. 4). And so does a 

parish priest and a bishop. (See the life of S. Abraham written by 

S. Ephrem.) He came from being an anchoret to be the pastor of a 

wild and barbarous people, and though cruelly entreated by them, 

brought them by his indomitable patience, gentleness, and charity, 

to submit to the laws of Christ. 

Jacob, like a true shepherd, watched over his flock by day and 

night (Gen. xxxi. 40); and shepherds were watching over their 

flocks by night when Christ was born. So too should a parish 

priest or a bishop vigilantly watch over his flock, as his first duty. 

A shepherd risks his own life in guarding his sheep. So should a 

parish priest, when persecution or pestilence threatens ; as did SS. 

Athanasius, Chrysostom, Basil, Ambrose. Lastly, S. Peter, the 

chief pastor of the Church, lays down notes for the pastors under 

him (1 Pet. v. 2). See also S. Gregory (in Pastorali), S. Bernard 

(de Consider, ad Eugenium), and S. Augustine (Tract de Pastoribus 

et Ovibus). 

All these duties are summed up in charity, for charity supremely 

loves God, and for His sake the faithful committed to its care by 

God. (See also chap. xxi. 15.) 

The good Shepherd layeth down his lifefor the sheep. This does not 

relate so much to the parable itself, as to that which is signified by it. 

For the natural Shepherd ought to count his own life of greater 

value than the lives of his sheep. And yet he ought to protect his 

sheep even at the risk of his life. But the shepherd of souls 

is bound, by his duty, to expose his bodily life to danger, for the 

spiritual life of the faithful committed to his charge. And hence 

he is bound to stand by them in the time of the plague, or provide

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyYQ_4VsTqalOiNAnm1nzPvA7ZsAeQD8DndNBiAjinj_MBEa4fd-eYMuvLHPUBJmLuLO7X1f1PAT_LZWdpPX1rIf_P9AGIhgkX8s1pzVq1llfwoxNE0M5RYXhM6L7XXwJU0mN71sg=w615-h900-v0

8ce97e98-09fd-4f45-b203-8ddc7943ba3c

368 S. JOHN, C. X. 

some other qualified person to administer the sacraments to the 

sick, as did S. Charles Borromeo : and for this reason was canonised. 

And so also all the apostles, excepting S. John, suffered martyrdom 

for the sake of the faithful committed to their care. And so also 

nearly all the Roman Pontiffs down to S. Sylvester. But the leader 

of them all was Christ, who alone, as the best of Shepherds, laid 

down His life as a ransom, while all the others did so merely to 

manifest their faith, and as a pattern of virtue. 

Ver. 12. 

 

But he that is an hireling, &c. An hireling seeks not 

the good of the sheep but merely his own profit. " Hirelings are 

they," says S. Augustine, " who seek their own things, and not the 

things of Christ and of the sheep." So too S. Basil. But the 

apostles, though they fed not their own sheep, but the sheep of 

Christ, were not hirelings, because they sought not their own 

temporal gain, but the spiritual and eternal gain of the faithful. 

" He is called a hireling, and not a shepherd," says S. Gregory 

{Horn, xiv.), "who feeds the Lord's sheep, not from deepest love, but 

for worldly gain. The hireling is he who holds the post of a shep-

herd, but seeks not to gain souls ; is eager for earthly advantages, 

rejoices in the honour of the prelacy, feeds on temporal gains, 

delights in the reverence paid to him by men." 

Seeth the wolf coming. " For in a time of tranquillity," says S. 

Gregory, "very often the hireling, as well as the true shepherd, 

stands on guard over the flock. But the approach of the wolf shows 

the temper of mind with which they did so. The wolf attacks the 

sheep when the violent and the spoiler oppress those who are 

faithful and humble. But he who seemed to be a shepherd and 

was not, leaves the sheep and runs away, because through fear for 

himself he does not venture to withstand his injustice." 

Fleeth : " Not by change of place," says S. Gregory, " but by with-

drawing support. He flies, because he saw injustice and held his 

peace : he flies, because he conceals himself by silence. To whom the prophet well says, "Ye have not gone up against him, nor 

raised up a wall for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the 

day of the Lord" (Ezek. xiii. 5).

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxkzd_0YOE0k73hWxrRkA2HAF8E4YD45S_SpN0nsMVDIojLqhjyeytK9AP91fby40jLCE0BpLiCzVLYLbl23jfbzjNMvaINrvMYOsGeDjPSuen3P4n8-MSBiquJXTLNxIvLobAU=w615-h900-v0

63984bf5-c4e6-4251-82b6-cf9d2391c6bd

WHO IS THE HIRELING. 369 

And the wolf catcheth them, i.e. A heretic, or any wicked man, 

who strives to pervert the faithful by word or example, or (as S. 

Gregory says) " the devil, who seizes them when he draws away 

this man to luxury, inflames another with avarice, puffs up another 

with pride, parts asunder others through anger, stimulates another 

with envy, supplants another by deceit. The devil therefore scatters 

the flock when he kills the faithful by temptations. But the hire-

ling is not inflamed by zeal against such attacks, is not enkindled 

by any warmth of love. Because by looking after mere outward 

advantages, he carelessly takes no account of the inward injury 

which is done to the flock." 

And hence, Christ leaves it to be gathered by contrast that the 

good shepherd when he sees the wolf coming neither flies nor for-

sakes his sheep, but stands firm and fights for them even to death, 

and in this way lays down his life for them. But when it is allow-

able for a pastor to fly when persecuted, and when not, see notes 

on S. Matt. x. 23. Also S. Augustine (Epis. clxxx. ad Honoratum). 

I use on this matter the words of S. Gregory the more freely, 

because he had full experience of those things in his own person. 

Ver. 13. 

 

The hirelingfleeth because he is an hireling, and careth 

notfor the sheep. As though it were said directly, he who loves not 

the sheep, but worldly gain, cannot stand firm when the sheep are in 

danger. For while he is aiming at honour, and rejoicing in worldly 

gain, he is afraid of exposing himself to danger, lest he should lose 

that which he loves. For no one takes such diligent care for that 

which is another's as he does for his own. And therefore the hire-

ling cares more for his own life than for the sheep which are not 

his ; and flies when the wolf comes, as caring more for his own life 

than for the sheep. 

Ver. 14.—/ am the good shepherd, and know My sheep. Christ 

knows His sheep not merely with the watchful and tender eyes of 

His Godhead (as S. Cyril says), but also with the eyes of His man-

hood (for it is as man that He is the Pastor of His Church). He 

knows who are His faithful ones, what are their gifts, and also what 

are their weaknesses, that He may increase the one, and heal the 

vol. iv. 2 A

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyAQ0Gk5WnO1c-XBJO22MIk2S5MVuLTI8vM8r3sCr5zn3KPliIGtMX_lmD0AEbl3MkmY98rFYD840QYmedUGAD6bxyJRMFRnN-4LtoMcQqsBkYQM6Tq4EZ-OmQNNoCSPDpp3Yti=w615-h900-v0

4c14ea86-193b-472b-b542-7fe9121a55b1

370 S. JOHN, c. X. 

other. He knows them therefore not merely speculatively, but 

practically, and heaps on them all His gifts, benefits, and graces. 

And am known of Mine, with the eyes of faith, hope, and charity, 

because they believe in Me, hope in Me, and love Me above all 

things. " Because I love them, they love Me in return, for love is 

the loadstone of love : if thou wishest to be loved, thou thyself must 

love. Love is the powerful allurement of love." So Theophylact. 

And besides this His love of us, He inspires in us love for Him in 

return. And this love is our highest good, leading us to heaven and 

making us blessed. 

Ver. 15. 

 

As the Father knoweth Me, &c. By this comparison 

Christ points out both the origin and also the greatness of the love 

which He bestows on His sheep. The boundless knowledge and 

love which exists between the Father and Myself, is the source of 

the love which exists between Myself and My faithful ones. Both 

because divine and uncreated love is the source of all human and 

created love ; and also because it is the Father's will that I should 

love My faithful ones with great and special love, as He loves Me, 

and I love Him with boundless affection ; for He wishes to adopt 

My faithful ones through Me who am His Son by nature, and He 

therefore loves them supremely as His children. And I do the 

same, because I submit in all things to the love and will of the 

Father ; nay more, My love is the same as the Father's, as our will, 

our nature, and our Godhead is the same. 

But here note the word "as" signifies similarity, not equality. 

For the Father loves the Son, and the Son loves the Father with 

uncreated, and therefore infinite love. But the Son, as man, loves 

His own with a created and finite love, and is loved with a like love 

by them in return. But there will be here also a kind of equality, 

if with Maldonatus you explain it thus : "When Christ says, J know 

My sheep, He speaks as God; but when He says, The Father 

knoweth Me, and I know My Father, He speaks of Himself as man. 

For just as Christ (as God) knows His sheep, and His sheep as men know Him in return ; so the Father, as God, knows the Son as man, 

and the Son, as man, acknowledges His Father, and calls Hirr

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz4EeLSoJy3eMofHhMoRFef76GFLe2-HJsyZBlY1VOhMUcumlgtuyN2kZuHTW1-U5CyIhszNnu8h2wOSI8HAZnw7RA3P8w_5_CyO-X2ldJgvOju60sS9-bPqQHD4pqn-Nzm1-cjIg=w615-h900-v0

4275aa3b-6f53-4a80-849a-2788c7574098

CHRIST'S OTHER SHEEP. 37 

 

Father, as we do ourselves. 'I ascend to My Father, and your 

Father'" (John xx. 17). 

And I lay down My lifefor My sheep. This refers back to verse 

14. "I know My sheep," I love them, i.e., most ardently, and 

therefore I lay down, i.e., I will shortly lay down, My life for them. 

He put in the words, "as the Father knoweth Me," to represent 

the source and the intensity of His love for His people, by His love 

for the Father, for it was this love which urged Him to lay down 

His life for His sheep. But the words " I lay down " signify that 

the death of Christ was not compulsory, but voluntary, self-chosen, 

and even loved for their salvation. So Leontius. And Christ thus 

expresses Himself below (ver. 18). "No man taketh it from Me, 

but I lay it down of Myself." And the words also signify, " I lay 

it down for a time, in order to take it again." The death of Christ 

therefore was not so much a death as the placing His soul for three 

days in Limbus. 

Ver. 16. 

 

And other sheep I have, &c. Other sheep, i.e., those 

who will be My sheep. This is spoken by anticipation. He 

means the Gentiles, and thus predicts their call and conversion, 

to show that He was to be the King and Shepherd of all nations, 

just as up to this time He had been of the Jews : and that, con-

sequently, He did not care (comparatively) whether the Jews (few 

as they were in number) would be unbelieving and rebellious, since 

He was about to put countless Gentiles in their place. So 

Rupertus, who adds, " and they will hear My voice," striking quietly 

at the Jews. 

And there will be one fold, and one shepherd. Some suppose that 

in the end of the world, God will convert all the Jews by Elias, and 

all the Gentiles by Enoch, and thus there will become one Church, 

made up of them both, and one Pastor, Christ, and His Vicar the 

Supreme Pontiff, who will be called the Angelic Pastor. (See the 

list of Popes, described symbolically, in the life of S. Malachi.) But 

they are in error. For neither will Elias convert all the Jews, nor 

Enoch all the Gentiles. For there will be then many unbelievers 

and followers of antichrist. But this is far from being the meaning

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAymxmV_LyMPyc4HOX4Yw_CyXmhw2yBTzsbg7iT1gWmClmsCM9YeqjdP-EY9HgLdwmXFlVwm-Wyn8_U1hVwUUQohU4nVZV4uaobu7rvQrFCff0Uvj4X8awybkmTA_nRsCzTJHvf2=w615-h900-v0

c6f5384e-0615-4273-ac1f-b60265314195

37 2 S. JOHN, c. X. 

of Christ. It was, that after His death and resurrection His apostles 

would be dispersed among all nations, and convert them, so that 

both Jews and Gentiles would be gathered into one Church of 

believers, under one Shepherd, Christ, and His Vicar, the Roman 

Pontiff. This is not to be looked forward to as something future, 

for it took place in the time of Constantine the first Christian 

emperor, who christianised nearly all the nations which were subject 

to him. The Apostle graphically sets this before us (Eph. ii.) 

Ver. 17. 

 

Therefore doth My Father love me, &c. Lest the Jews 

should despise Him as a mere man who would die on the Cross, 

He meets the objection by saying that His death would be glorious, 

and an object of desire, because He could of His own accord sub-

mit to it from love of, and obedience to the Father, and therefore to 

be loved, honoured, and exalted, that at the Name of Jesus every 

knee should bow, &c. (Phil ii. 10). 

I lay down My life, i.e. My soul. So S. Augustine and others, 

who from this passage prove that Christ had a human soul, in 

opposition to Apollinarius, who maintained that His Divinity was in 

the place of a soul. But others understand by it " life" which is 

caused by the union of soul and body. It comes to the same thing. 

That 1 may take it again. I do not destroy it but only lay it aside 

for a short time, that I may rise and take it again. S. Cyril refers 

back to the words " My Father loveth Me." He loves Me not 

merely because I set My sheep free by My death, but also because 

I quicken them by My rising again. As S. Paul says, Rom. iv. 25. 

Ver. 18. No one taketh it from Me, but 1 lay it down of Myself, 

For though the Jews are about to slay Me by force, yet this force of 

theirs would not avail against Me, unless I allow it of My own accord. 

And again, " Though I allow it, yet it is still in My power to die, or 

not to die. For by My Godhead I can impart such strength to My manhood, that it cannot be destroyed by any nails, blows, scourg-

ings, or wounds which I suffer by My own will 

; 

just as I support 

the bodies of the beatified, and render them impassible." So Toletus. 

And hence Christ on the Cross cried aloud and gave up the ghost 

to show that He died without compulsion, and of His own accord,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw8eHZ79VgZ-LMxAh8mxBL0Jy1uHWYqQHY9OxilZGcfPaF0w59x2qoRvPq9HQeCuLnfH_YcnlYB4lK4YVgLzjXYsMQkopLr4i3jkNRAPwXdqPiL9uHTFUZAxbpJrKBRsgv2uHfrRw=w615-h900-v0

5b113aac-4f15-4454-9b10-7b08a38f343f

CHRIST'S WILLING OBEDIENCE. 373 

when He might, had He so willed, have lived on. For He who 

had strength to cry aloud, had strength also to live, so that the 

centurion beholding this said, " Truly this was the Son of God 

 

(Matt, xxvii. 54). 

I havepower, &c. By My mighty and glorious Resurrection, which 

My soul will effect through the Power of My Divinity, hypostati-

cally united to it. He here signifies that He is God as well as man 

; 

is man He lays down His life, as God He resumes it. So S. Cyril. 

This commandment have I receivedfrom My Father. This was the 

reason for laying down His life. He was so ordered by the Father, 

lest the Jews should object, " You have taken this duty on yourself, 

that Thou mightest be worshipped, as the Mediator, Messiah, and 

Saviour of the world." It is hence clear that it was a weighty com-

mandment He received, that of suffering and dying on the Cross. 

" He became obedient " (to the commandment of the Father, for 

obedience properly so called presupposes a command, and is in fact 

its correlative ; for obedience is that which is ordered, and a com-

mand implies obedience, for it is the formal object of obedience) 

" even to the death of the cross." So S. Cyril, S. Ambrose (de Fide, 

v. 5), S. Thomas, Suarez and others. But this command did not 

physically compel the will of Christ to obey it. It left it free. 

But it pertained to the Person of the Word to " prevent " the will of 

Jesus by supplies of grace, to which It foresaw it would willingly 

consent, and obey the command. And it was in this respect, that is 

in consequence of the continual keeping (cusiodiam) of the Word, 

that the manhood of Christ was said to be extrinsically impeccable, 

not because the Word predetermined It, but because It supplied It 

with fitting aids, with which It foresaw it would freely obey the 

command. For by this foreknowledge of future conditional events 

the freedom of Christ's will is fully preserved (see Suarez, part iii. 

Quest, xviii.) And by this generous obedience in so difficult a 

matter, Christ obtained salvation for us, and glory for Himself. 

Set then, O Religious, this command of the Father, and this 

obedience of Christ before thine eyes, when any difficult task is 

imposed on thee by thy Superior. R. Juda says admirably (Pirke

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAybJAro9y4SiqUbdGUlSlmnf9A4mKXv7L0EBNGjmWGB9l2QCeQ_718_GjW_FH6P15LEEgi-ISYWNg8RVoPmpFfLie0CQbbth9vwYG1ldII0ukIGDSa1gSW97bfACQebXYAro9jeaw=w615-h900-v0

ba89c74d-3df8-4f0c-8898-3b76bd25ac39

374 s - JOHN, c. X. 

Avoth. cap. v.), "Be daring as a leopard, swift as an eagle, nimble 

as a deer, courageous as a lion, to do the will of thy Father which 

is in heaven." 

Ver. 20. 

 

And many of them said, &c. 

Ver. 21.— Others said, &c. For he is proud as Lucifer, and insti-

gated by him, He calls God His Father and makes Himself the 

Son of God. 

He is thoroughly mad in saying that he lays down His life of 

Himself, though we see that He is alive, and no one does so except 

by compulsion. Moreover, Christ did not reply to these calumnies, 

as not being worthy of an answer, and also because He allowed 

those who supported Him to answer, for we give greater credit to 

others than to one who testifies of himself. 

Ver. 21. And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication. 

When the first temple was dedicated, as S. Cyril holds, or rebuilt by 

Zerubbabel, as S. Chrysostom and others suppose, or what is more 

probable its rededication, after its profanation by Antiochus 

Epiphanes. The feast was held on the 25th of the month Casleu. 

It was celebrated with great rejoicing, and was called the feast of 

Lights (see Josephus, Ant. xii. 2, and 2 Mace. i. 18). All which S. 

John records from chap vii. 2 to this point took place in the two 

months between the Feast of Tabernacles and the Feast of the 

Dedication : and in the three following months up to the Feast of 

the Passover there occurred the events which are recorded here to the 

end of the Gospel, and also in S. Luke from chap. xv. onwards. 

Tropologically :—These Encomia set forth the renewal of a mind 

polluted by sin, and sanctified and consecrated anew to God by 

repentance. 

And it was winter. This was stated, says Theophylact, to signify 

the approaching time of the Passion which took place the following 

spring. S. Cyril adds that it was said in order to give the reason 

why Jesus walked in the Porch, so as to be under cover from the 

cold. Mystically there is here signified (says the Gloss) the cold-

ness of the Jews, who draw not near to the fire, i.e. who believe 

not in Christ. S. Augustine says, " The Jews were cold in charity

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzLjpw1zCGPuf8dzpKgr6OXgnmyf1LGxGLzrPeSarG8CL4WuwNyVn9Yb16oahAB2vDL66qCpgfGhHtFHAyd1Y6QYjlVidgjcD-ebsgve1HnT4PHn36yvDjwDIdmrWBZWjT0eXXOcg=w615-h900-v0

1d92b06c-a962-4777-bb7c-545fb3d31d46

SOLOMON'S TORCH. 375 

and love, and were burning with eagerness to do hurt ; they 

approached Him not as followers, but pressed on Him as perse-

cutors." " Do thou also," says Theophylact, " while it is winter, that 

is while this present life is shaken with the whirlwinds of iniquity, 

keep the spiritual dedication feast, by daily renewing thyself, and 

by ordering the ascensions of thy heart." Christ will be present to 

thee in Solomon's Porch, making for thee a peaceable resting-place. 

Ver. 23. 

 

And Jesus walked in the temple. In the Porch (or 

Portico), the outer part of the temple. In Solomon's porch. The 

temple of the Jews had two parts. The first, the Sanctuary, fre-

quented only by the Priests, who discharged three functions, burning 

morning and evening incense on the altar of incense, lighting the 

lamps and replacing the shew-bread every Sabbath. The inner part, 

the Holy of Holies, which the High Priest alone entered once 

every year on the day of expiation. But since Christ was not 

descended from the tribe of Levi, He could not enter either of these 

parts of the temple. 

But in front of the temple there was a Court or Vestibule ; the 

upper part was the court of the Priests, the outer part, adjoining 

the inner court, was the court of the people, where they prayed and 

witnessed the sacrifices which were offered in the Court of the 

Priests. It was in this Court that Christ went to and fro and taught, 

and it had porticoes all round it, in which the people took shelter 

from the weather. Ribera (de Templo, 1. 6) and others think that this 

was called Solomon's Porch. Others with Villalpandus, Maldona-

tus, &c, think more probably that this particular portico was called 

Solomon's as having been built by him long after the building of 

the temple, when the slope of the hill was levelled, and the portico 

was built at the eastern side of the temple. (See Josephus, B.Jud. vi. 

6.) It was called Solomon's to distinguish it from the other 

porticoes which others added to the temple. Or else, as Baronius 

thinks, when the temple was burnt by the Chaldeans this portico 

alone remained, or else was rebuilt in the same form as that in 

which it had been erected by Solomon. (See on Acts iii. 11.) 

Ver. 24. Then came the Jews, &c. How long dost thou keep us

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz15EnCrimlx0jO00ekpMmb2j2kF4NYiDD3Eu_96HpXSNW_fG3G12v6Hwuzdd86dkC9oqix-oWpvWssXO5NplrKzwr9b2xHYv-hgWVMlzM0T3M0XxAJanxp6s57KFEBV_cF9DnHug=w615-h900-v0

ace664e7-961d-49da-953e-68cdf401ee5a

tf6 S. JOHN, C X. 

in suspense? We wish to see the Messiah, and hope that Thou wilt 

declare Thyself to be He. They pretend this, in order to draw a 

confession from Christ, on which to accuse Him. For as says S. 

Augustine, "They do not desire the truth, but are getting up a 

charge, to accuse Him of making Himself the Messiah." So also S. 

Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Euthymius. But Christ so guarded 

His reply as not to give room for a false charge, and yet made it 

clear to the faithful that He was Christ the Son of God. 

If thou art Christ, tell us plainly. That we may all be able to 

worship Thee openly as the Messiah. So did these hypocrites 

fulfil the predictions of David (Ps. xxii. 16 and Ps. cxviii. 12). For, 

as S. Chrysostom says, " Christ spake everything openly, and said 

nothing secretly." And S. Augustine, " They sought to hear from 

Him that He was Christ, that so they might accuse Him of claiming 

kingly power." 

Ver 25. Jesus answered them, I told you, &c. I have told you 

plainly that I am the Messiah. But ye said, Thou bearest witness 

of Thyself. Thy witness is not true (John viii. 15). But what I 

have said I constantly confirm by miracles. For I do them in the 

name, that is by the authority, will, and supernatural Power of God 

the Father. But ye continue obstinately in your unbelief, and 

ialsely state that they are the works of the devil. How then will ye 

believe My words ? So S. Chrysostom. 

Ver. 26. 

 

But ye believe not, &c. Ye will not submit to Me as 

your Shepherd, and accept Me as your Messiah. But ye rather 

wish Me to submit Myself to you, and to be My superiors, censors, 

and calumniators. It is ambition which makes you grudge Me the 

headship of the Church ; and that ye refuse to believe Me. S. 

Augustine by "sheep " understands the elect. But this is not the 

proper nor the adequate cause of their rejecting Christ. For repro-

bation is not the cause, but rather the result of unbelief and sin. 

It was not that God had cast off the Jews that they sinned by 

unbelief. But it was because they chose to disbelieve and sin, that 

God cast them off. And it was not an adequate cause, because 

many of them who disbelieved in Him, believed in Him afterwards

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwNjbJfF6cviuahd8imLYDWmH65_AST96yGPXsRaIJ8KNZ4-DGPtCwBHYN2owy9UdyTGeBPj1UB4L29-VgQE4M1KYb7gQq0Gvwjbn4uETM2FqfK-NNU4pPVMEl1sNfUahltLlChxA=w615-h900-v0

f7a33a02-10e6-4687-8b32-736abf4ae362

MAN'S COOPERATION. 377 

through the preaching of the apostles. And again some then believed 

in Christ who were not predestinated, but afterwards fell away into 

sin, as Judas and others. 

Ver. 27. 

 

My sheep hear my voice. He leaves the inference to 

them : but ye hear not my voice, and are therefore not My sheep. 

(See above, ver. 4.) 

Ver. 28. And Igive unto them eternal life. The sheep of Christ 

are of two kinds : first, all Christians ; and secondly, those alone who 

are predestinated to glory. The words of Christ relate to the 

second class. And S. Augustine shows why they do not perish. 

For they are of those sheep of whom it is said, "The Lord knoweth 

who are His." They are specially the sheep of Christ, none of 

whom perish. And yet of the former class Christ also says, " I give 

unto them eternal life," that is, as far as I may. I make them the 

promise. I give them all necessary helps. I wish for their salva-

tion. If then any of them perish it is not My fault but theirs, for 

they will not co-operate with My grace. For neither the devil nor 

any one else is able to pluck them out of My hand, if they resolve 

to abide in it, and will not be torn away. For My grace, if they 

cooperate with it, has power to keep them from being taken from 

Me. But if they leave Me of their own will, it is not a tearing away, 

but their own voluntary act. So S. Cryil, Leontius, Theophylact, 

and Maldonatus. Christ means to say that no power can take them 

away, but they have full liberty to go away from Christ. 

I give unto them eternal life, that is if they abide in faith and 

obedience to Me. I give it in this world through grace by hope, 

and I will hereafter give it in glory. He invites the Jews by this 

promise to become His sheep, and reproves them for refusing to do 

so. The faithful are in the "hand," that is under the protection 

and guardianship of Christ. This is signified by the hand, which 

ministers to the whole body (see S. Isidore, Etym. xi. 1). 

Ver. 29. My Father which gave them Me is greater than all 

(the Vulgate and Latin fathers read "majus," the Greek fathers 

fifi^m), and no one is able to pluck them out of My Father's hand. 

Because the Divine Nature which the Father gave Me, and its

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy-nx8lkmxTx4sTpo6P8UMGTSAa9WeXCx4RoaXiqZJkEKOBUN0RmmswwyXhYIUjjy1-ReGewGNBFRHkBuxMtgl1ciYmKD7Fn6pEFztkiVtyP34__ya3ZXc-Ct3-668IKfZItBtQWg=w615-h900-v0

2cc77932-ea0c-4fdd-9683-4007746daa13

37" s. joiin, c x. 

almighty power, is greater than all created beings, even angels and 

devils, and as no one can pluck them out of My Father's hand, so 

can they not pluck them out of My own, for the hand and the power 

of the Father and Myself are one and the same. (So S. Augustine, 

Bede, Maldonatus; and see S. Ambrose, de Spir. Sancto, iii. 18. S. 

Hilary, de Trin. lib. vii., and Tertullian, contra Praxeam). He says 

this against the Jews who regarded Him as a mere man, " Know 

then that the Eternal Father gave Me a Divine Nature and Per-

sonality far higher than any created nature, whether angels or men." 

Others explain it, that the sheep committed to Me by the Father 

must be more highly valued by Me than anything else ; and no one 

can pluck them either out of My Father's hand, or out of My own 

hand. But the first explanation is both the most sublime, and most 

full of meaning. 

S. Cyril explains it thus, " My Father has committed to Me, His 

Incarnate Son, the care of His sheep. As God I have equal power 

with Him, and as man My hand is strengthened by the Almighty 

Hand of the Father." Whence the Interlinear Gloss explains the 

word "hand" by " Me, who am the Hand of the Father." For as 

S. Augustine says, " men call their ' hands ' those persons through 

whom they do what they wish." The two explanations come to the 

same thing. 

Ver. 30.—/ and My Father are one, not only by agreement and 

consent of will, as the Arians hold, but also one in Essence and 

Godhead, the same in number,* not in species, for otherwise there 

would be more Gods than one. Christ speaks here as God and the 

Word of the Father. And from this the fathers prove His Godhead 

against the Arians. And the Jews understood the words in the 

same sense, and consequently sought to stone Him as a blasphemer. 

And Christ Himself explained them in the same sense, for He said, 

I am the Son of God. It is clear also from His line of argument, 

"being one with the Father I have the same Almighty power." For 

where the essence is the same, the power is also the same. So says 

S. Hilary (de Trinit. lib. viii.), "The Father and the Son are One, 

* Used in a logical sense,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwQOn6Cg5mqqE2KUosZdlC3iPwcRL0Z5c1SCrdkhw5X03WiRfTVh32omC28Rzlx3S-bnp_xyVlqFoviNSAIXngH0ZwQrVsqmSZIhAQMFKmOE3bRKPtze2zoKFfvsR3rCOtCIdRC=w615-h900-v0

dd694a81-66fb-45e0-9299-9662065fb9c1

HOW CHRIST ONE WITH THE FATHER. 379 

not as He speaks of the faithful (in chap, xvii.), 'That they may be 

one,' but one in nature, honour, and power." " He steers between 

Scylla and Charybdis," says S. Augustine (in loc), "between Arius 

and Sabellius ; for by speaking of ' One ' He signifies Oneness 

of nature. But by saying 'we are' He indicates a plurality of 

persons, which Sabellius denied, affirming that God was One in 

Person, as well as in Essence." S. Augustine says the same (de 

Trinit. vi. 2). See Bellarmine (de Christo, i. 6). 

Ver. 31. 

 

The Jews therefore took up stones to stone Him, as a 

blasphemer. The Jews show in this their hypocrisy, malignity, and 

hatred of Christ, and that they did not honestly, but craftily and 

insidiously, ask Him whether He were the Christ. But Christ as 

being God kept them from casting on Him the stones which they 

held in their hands. "Hard as stones," says S. Augustine, "they 

rushed to the stones." Mystically, says S. Hilary (de Trinit. lib. vii.), 

" And now also heretics hurl the stones of their words, to cast down, 

if they can, Christ from His throne ; inspired, no doubt, by Lucifer, 

who aimed at obtaining this throne of Godhead, and therefore 

grudged it to Christ, and is active in taking it away by means of 

heretics." 

Ver. 32. -Jesus answered, &c. He replied not to the words, for 

none had been spoken, but to the crafty intention of the Jews. He 

answered, i.e., He asked them for what cause do ye wish to stone 

Me ? By works He means the miracles which He had wrought by 

the authority and supernatural aid of God the Father. And He 

thus quietly reproves their ingratitude and malignity. I have healed, 

He would say, your blind, and lame, and sick, by My Divine power, 

when destitute of all human aid ; why do ye ungratefully repay My many kindnesses by evil treatment, and wish to stone Me? 

Ver. 33. The Jews answered, For a good work, &c. " The Jews " 

(says S. Augustine) " understood that which the Arians understand 

not. For they felt that it could not be said, ' I and the Father are 

one,' unless the Father and the Son were equal." 

Ver. 34. 

 

Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law 

(Ps. lxxxii. 6), / said, Ye are gods ? The word in Hebrew is plural.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwkpgZEuUauE9LGseE50GIBpDF35OFut8M6oplLGMlT2Hves7MV_7-zhwACeOYH07M06bz29PRNCgSto5CAtrtOQrPqXuAqa_QBPzH5MuO5FCA9uUAMMGKTnDFn8DEp4diroIiWXA=w615-h900-v0

2f1d8f44-5d5c-470f-bd3d-f408193339af

380 S. JOHN, C. X. 

God is called Elohim, as ruling and governing the world, and as the 

judge and punisher of evil-doing. Whence angels and judges who 

share this power are called gods, not by nature or by hypostatical 

union (as Christ), but by participating in the Divine judgments (see 

Ex. vii. 1, xxii. 28 ; Ps. viii. 6, in the Hebrew Elohim). But there, 

as S. Hilary observes {Lib. vii. de Trinit.), the word Elohim is limited 

by the context, so as to make it clear that the word does not signify 

God, but angels or judges. And so in Ps. lxxxii., " God standeth 

in the congregation of princes. He is the judge among gods." The 

gods who are judged are men or angels, He who judges them is the 

One True God. " Just as Christ here," says S. Augustine, " judges 

as God the Pharisees and rulers of the Jews, who were gods, so to 

speak, upon earth." On this account He quotes this psalm which is 

in Hebrew Elohim, judges. Elohim, the highest of all, judges the 

earthly rulers who are under Him. This is supported by the Chaldee 

Targum, which explains, " Ye are gods, and are all the children of the 

Highest;" "ye are the angels of the high God." And that which 

is properly said of angels is extended to all Israelites and the faithful, 

for they are the sons of God. But when the word " Elohim " is 

used " absolutely " (without limitation) it signifies the One and 

True God. 

Christ therefore, instead of overthrowing the opinion of the Jews, 

rather confirms it. 

Ver. 35. 

 

IfHe called them gods unto whom the word of God came, 

whom the Word of God appointed judges and gave them authority 

by Moses and his successors, and commanded them to judge rightly 

as partaking His authority, making them (says Euthymius) gods, as it 

were, upon earth. And the Scripture cannot be broken : no one, i.e., 

can take from them the name of judges, which the irrevocable word 

of Scripture has given them. 

Ver. 36. Say ye of Him, &c. This is an argument from the less 

to the greater. " If judges, who only participate in the power of 

God, are rightly called gods, much more can I be called God, who 

am the Very Word of God." 

S. Augustine and Bede more acutely, but less to the point, main-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxEL7-g07vi0tLWF9Sf0wKjWHvzMyusAg78xZslfc4G9orX-DJf3wsOEVp1K2B5PVTY4k_VJ4aZqXy8-vBzUd3mtx2eduvy328xrQMwcJB-qKYvQ06D5zgMTexAePzCu5ojuBUPmg=w615-h900-v0

55f0ed42-91bc-4216-a02b-d677bac81b12

HOW CHRIST WAS SANCTIFIED. 38 

 

tain that the force of the argument is this, if they who are merely 

partakers of the word of God are called gods, much more am I, who 

am not merely a partaker of the word of God, but the Word of God 

Itself. 

Note here that the words, " He whom the Father hath sanctified," 

have several meanings. (1.) He to whom the Father hath communi-

cated the sanctity wherewith He is holy, whom the Father, when He 

begat Him, made to be holy, says S. Augustine. For God the 

Father who is holy begat the Son who is holy. So Bede, Toletus, 

and others. The Son is therefore holy in His generation and 

essence. (2.) The Father sanctified Christ as man, by means of 

the Hypostatical Union ; for by this (speaking accurately) is the 

manhood of Christ sanctified in the highest degree. For by the 

very act wherewith the Person of the Word (Itself uncreated and 

infinite Sanctity) assumed the humanity, and united it hypostatically 

to Itself, It clearly sanctified it, and thus infused into its soul the 

pre-eminent sanctity of charity, grace, and all other virtues. And so 

S. Hilary says, " Jesus was sanctified to be His Son, since S. Paul 

says, 'He was predestinated to be the Son of God with power, by 

the Spirit of sanctification.'" And so too S. Chrysostom, and S. 

Athanasius (de Incarn. Verb. sub. init.) " Sanctified " is therefore 

the same as "sealed," as I said chap. vi. 27. (3.) Theophylact says, 

" He sanctified, that is He sanctioned His sacrifice for the world, 

showing that He was not such a god as the others were ; for to save 

the world is the work of God, not of a man deified by grace. As 

Christ says (xvii. 19), I sanctify Myself, i.e., I sacrifice Myself, I offer 

Myself as a holy Victim." (4.) Maldonatus says : " He sanctified 

Me, i.e., He designated and destined Me to the office of Saviour," 

referring to Jer. i. 5, though the truer meaning of the passage is dif-

ferent, as I have there stated. 

Ver. 37. 

 

If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not. 

He appeals to the miracles which He wrought by the command 

and supernatural power of God the Father. For these, as being 

divine, proved Him to be the very Son of God. 

Ver. 38. Bui if 1 do, &c, and I in the Father, working by the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwKx4CtlVBhuN29jFCTgyAJUR2a3oQkr2AFgOFWqnfC5ZrVqEmbTwzTlrG4iSVTTSByZUn10meCjQeeOaD-nOB_dOMxzrHI2hbM9BdAaJB4KI5TwGTDIcgrLHY8_KrvFYyefb2NBQ=w615-h900-v0

cd6b82cd-2705-4f41-aa29-aa26b4ed420c

382 S. JOHN, c. X. 

same Godhead and omnipotence which I have received from Him. 

Accordingly S. Augustine, Cyril, Leontius, &c, consider that the 

words, " I in the Father and the Father in Me," mean the same as 

"I and the Father are one." S. Augustine says (in loc), "We are 

in God, and God in us. But can we say, 'I and God are one?' 

Thou art in God, because God containeth thee; God is in thee, 

because thou art made the temple of God. But because thou art 

in God, and God in thee, canst thou therefore say, ' He who seeth 

God seeth Me,' as the only Begotten said, ' He that seeth Me, 

seeth the Father also, and I and the Father are one ? 

' Recognise 

what is proper to the Lord, and also the duty of the servant. 

What improper to the Lord is equality with the Father; the duty of 

the servant is to be partaker of the Saviour." 

Ver. 39. 

 

The Jews therefore sought again to take Him, but He 

escaped out of their hands. " That their anger might be appeased 

by His withdrawal," says S. Chrysostom. S. Augustine, acutely 

but symbolically, "They took Him not, because they had not the 

hand of faith." He escaped by His Divine Power, making Himself 

invisible. As He did, viii. 59. 

Ver. 40. A7id went away again beyondJordan, into the place where 

fohn at first baptized. In Bethabara, or Bethania, where Christ was 

baptized by him. He afterwards baptized in ^Enon (see chap. iii. 23), 

frequently shifting His abode. He went through other districts of 

Jordan, He withdrew to Bethabara, that the people who followed 

Him thither might call to mind the testimony which John had 

borne to Him on the very spot, and also the testimony of God the 

Father at His baptism, and might on this account believe in Him. 

So S. Chrysostom. 

And there abode : till the Passover and his own Passion drew 

nigh, when He returned to Jerusalem, and raised up Lazarus, which 

provoked the scribes and rulers against Him. 

Ver. 41. And many resorted, &c. And yet we believed him. 

Therefore we ought the more firmly to believe in Jesus, who proves 

that He is the Messiah by so many signs and miracles. So S. 

Chrysostom.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw5HSltklmb2vOtXZAk3ShgyRmlDFK4S8wPsmFWUb0jYrXi9PSJ1VX2aANvXR2NebccuV-iuIFQCGNRQOf0pDQ6QZL-UEOPjPa8wVAyUyKjHbmbMfIaqqh6KtNnjegsVXGkjMAI=w615-h900-v0

611d8966-2f4d-44a7-b9c3-9f4fded4704f

MANY BELIEVED. 383 

There was also another reason for their believing in Christ 

 

namely, that they found Him to be mightier than John in His 

miracles, in the power of His discourses, in His holiness of life, as 

John had foretold. And hence they inferred, If we see that the 

other things which John spake of Him are true, it is therefore 

equally true (as he said) that Jesus was the Messiah. 

Ver. 41. 

 

And many believed oti Him, for doubtless, as S. Augustine 

says, " they apprehended Him when He was tarrying with them, and 

not as the Jews wished to apprehend Him, as He was going away. 

Let us therefore by the lamp attain to the day; for John was a 

lamp, and bore witness to the day."

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz-3585UsZDbaYqyFnhK-CC1286MQZkTYchcY7XkI8BS2-LW_Y6Y_ifE9kljkPl3WMf5_RddFv3Dn6MwsGxoNW2SskToLdoguvtOT85cCNJH-vBHOZ57_HLMJern5fhzX5YG4hecQ=w615-h900-v0

0c0eb09b-85f2-4a49-8e1f-ee0298829613

( 3^4 ) 

CHAPTER XI. 

I Christ raiseth Lazarus, four days buried. 45 Many Jews believe. 47 The 

high priests and Pharisees gather a council against Christ. 49 Caiaphas 

prophesieth. 54 Jesus hid Himself. 55 At the passover they inquire after 

Him, and lay -wait for Him. 

NOW a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary 

and her sister Martha. 

2 (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his 

feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.) 

3 Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou 

lovest is sick. 

4 When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the 

glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. 

5 Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 

6 When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in 

the same place where he was. 

7 Then after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again. 

8 His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee 

 

and goest thou thither again ? 

9 Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day ? If any man walk in 

the day, he stumbleth not, because he seelh the light of this world. 

10 But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in 

him. 

11 These things said he : and after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus 

sleepeth ; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep. 

12 Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. 

13 Howbeit Jesus spake of his death ; but they thought that he had spoken of 

taking of rest in sleep. 

14 Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. 

15 And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may 

believe ; nevertheless let us go unto him. 

16 Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples, Let 

us also go, that we may die with him. 

17 Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days 

already. 

18 Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off : 

19 And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them con-

cerning their brother.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAymbMP1VpTkuG920VChmuUo_hMBTUXbwS9JSUMOsvtcGoaIT9UrtMRu0maQUI2UaHVJYu63Tus5gdJEETfc52lZkQZJzwhHUghGjfhosLTGoNsYFtBTT_PkALoAzUpXKqVFGpZuGw=w615-h900-v0

8281617c-f3b2-4e52-988c-afe882d4ae9b

THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN. 385 

20 Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met 

him : but Mary sat still in the house. 

21 Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother 

had not died. 

22 But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will 

give it thee. 

23 Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. 

24 Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection 

at the last day. 

25 Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life : he that believeth in 

me, though he were dead, yet shall he live : 

26 And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou 

this? 

27 She saith unto him, Yea, Lord : I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son 

of God, which should come into the world. 

28 And when she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister 

secretly, saying, The Master is come, and calleth for thee. 

29 As soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him. 

30 Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where 

Martha met him. 

31 The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when 

they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She 

goeth unto the grave to weep there. 

32 Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down 

at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not 

died. 

33 When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which 

came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, 

34 And said, Where have ye laid him ? They said unto him, Lord, come and 

see. 

35 Jesus wept. 

36 Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him ! 

37 And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the 

blind, have caused that even this man should not have died? 

38 Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, cometh to the grave. It was a 

cave, and a stone lay upon it. 

39 Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, 

saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh : for he hath been dead four 

days. 

40 Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, 

thou shouldest see the glory of God ? 

41 Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. 

And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard 

me. 

42 And I knew that thou hearest me always : but because of the people which 

stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me. 

43 And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come 

forth. 

44 And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes } 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxrFyuOSz-9wTlSyk5dsI7uZ5W9Srz7vhWZSwsw31NDcAGqLBtkdgH0R8h2AStSI7S6FcGKtzRwDINTdgYzta9ERY1iptQV2g-4u5VYKgQ-bOpQgkg_4Z588ZwJXOzc2Qs-0HnjUQ=w615-h900-v0

f2309415-0447-42e1-ae72-fb7fe745c52a

386 s. John, c. xi. 

and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, 

and let him go. 

45 Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which 

Jesus did, believed on him. 

46 But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what 

things Jesus had done. 

47 IT Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, 

What do we ? for this man doeth many miracles. 

48 If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him : and the Romans 

shall come and take away both our place and nation. 

49 And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, 

said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, 

50 Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the 

people, and that the whole nation perish not. 

51 And this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he pro-

phesied that Jesus should die for that nation 

; 

52 And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one 

the children of God that were scattered abroad. 

53 Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to 

death. 

54 Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews ; but went thence 

unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there 

continued with his disciples. 

55 IT And the Jews' passover was nigh at hand : and many went out of the 

country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves. 

56 Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stood in 

the temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast ? 

57 Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, 

that, if any man knew where he were he should shew it, that they might take 

him. 

Ver. 1. 

 

Lazarus, a man honourable and rich, and therefore 

another person than the Lazarus who lay full of sores at the doors 

of the rich glutton (Luke xvi.) 

Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha, in which, i.e., 

they dwelt as honoured residents, and as disciples and hostesses of 

Christ. 

Mystically, Bethany is in the Hebrew the house of affliction, accord-

ing to the Syriac version, and this agrees to the circumstances ; for 

the sickness and death of Lazarus afflicted both him and his sisters. 

Secondly, Bethany is house of obedience. 

Thirdly, Bethany, says Pagninus, is the same as the house of reply, 

or of the Lord's hearing, because there Christ heard the prayer of Martha and Mary, interceding for the life of Lazarus.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxTmMpLIKOZlnYHnM0Dp8Dn-nSUAPHPg22jAZ7S8b5hfWp3Tf81GMUD-6vrbBSIxkXe6r4Fw7zFVUrSmYF3ceHwBglKyQUWJjPTXdTHkprGEOrEZ08xVMrsoPxGIOFuEm610I8I=w615-h900-v0

98d9d597-f212-4bf2-9501-e5f0661059c2

THE SISTERS' PRAYER. 387 

John passes from what Christ did in the Feast of the Dedication, 

as appears from x. 22, to the doings of Christ a little before the 

last Passover, as appears in v. 55 ; that is, he leaps from December 

to March : he omits therefore the doings of Christ in January and 

February, because Luke relates those at length from chapters xv. 

to xix. 

Ver. 2. 

 

It was Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment, and 

wiped His feet with her hair (Luke vii. 37). I have shown that the 

Mary who twice, or as some say, three times, anointed Christ, was with-

out doubt the same as Mary Magdalene ; although some think that 

there were two, and others three. 

Whose brother Lazarus was sick. John adds this, to suggest a 

cause for the raising of Lazarus, namely, that he was the brother of 

the Magdalene, who was wholly devoted to Jesus, and besought of 

Him the raising up of her brother Lazarus. 

Therefore his sisters sent, &c. Cyril, Theophylact, and Leontius 

think that these are words of astonishment and as of a person 

wondering, How is it possible that one should be stricken down by 

disease whom Thou lovest, Lord, who hast the power oflife and death ? 

how can sickness have dared to attack one who is filled with love of 

Thee ? and how can weakness hold him in whom Thy love dwells ? 

Others, more simply, think the sisters to have spoken that out of 

faith and confidence. As S. Augustine, and from him Bede : They 

did not say, Come, for to one who loved it was enough only to 

announce the fact. They did not dare to say, Come and heal ; they 

did not dare to say, Give the command there, and here it shall come 

to pass, for why shall it not be so with them, if the faith of that cen-

turion is praised by speaking thus? For he said, Lord, I am not 

worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my roof, but speak the word 

only, and my servant shall be healed. None of these things said 

they ; but only, Lord, he whom Thou lovest is sick ; it is enough that 

Thou knowest it ; for Thou wilt not love and leave uncared for 

 

This then is the prayer implied, but hidden and implicit, because it 

signifies the necessity and the desire for help ; which is often more 

efficacious than an open solicitation, because it is more humble,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyN7NQ6wxYc2n8rDH8HYZ_0G54ytJ7tK4DN6w56AXGfhMl397rAo7La5d-Ae-sgaMiXJYfSF0dOk_MvlG1Xpk_MylfXsRtRqb5kvE_W1k91eCvXH--Dyr18vOqMu8iKTMeCbLF3=w615-h900-v0

fd4254df-0a8b-4553-9d1c-432fed556b8a

388 S. JOHN, C. XI. 

modest, relying, and trustful. So out of S. Thomas Suarez' Treatise 

on Prayer. 

Therefore this petition of the sisters shows, First, great faith 

; 

for 

they do not say, Come, hasten, lest death be beforehand with Thee. 

For they believe that Christ is able to cure even when absent 

; 

yea, 

even to raise again the dead. So Cyril, Theophylact, Rupertus. 

Secondly, great trustfulness, in that they confided that Christ, at 

the mere hearing of the sickness, would bring a remedy to it, 

whence they do not multiply words and petitions. Thirdly, great 

love : Behold, he whom Thou lovest ; as if they would say, Thou lovest 

us, and we Thee : it is sufficient for one who loves to announce the 

danger of the loved one. For love outweighs all prayers. Fourthly, 

resignation ; for they resign themselves wholly to the providence of 

Christ, that concerning the disease and the sufferer, He should 

order and dispose as should befit His providence and love. There-

fore this their prayer was efficacious, and is to be frequently used 

and imitated by us. 

Figuratively, Rabanus and from him the Gloss : Lazarus, he says, 

is a sinner and is loved by the Lord ; for He has not come to call 

the righteous, but sinners ; the sisters are holy men, or good 

thoughts, who pray for the loosing of sins. 

Lastly, the sisters did not themselves come to Jesus, but only 

sent messengers, both because they were women, to whom the care 

of the house pertained, and to whom a long journey would have been 

unfitting ; and because their brother Lazarus, who was nigh unto 

death, needed their assistance ; and because, trusting in the good-

ness and love of Christ, they thought a messenger sufficient. So 

S. Chrysostom, Cyril, and Euthymius. 

Ver. 4.— When Jesus heard that He said, This sickness is not, &c. 

First, because this death of Lazarus shall not be so much death, as 

sleep; for he shall wake again and rise from it. Whence (ver. n) He saith : Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, but I go that I may awake 

him out of sleep. Secondly, as if He said: The end and object of 

the sickness of Lazarus is not death, but the glory of God ; for God did not send it on him in order that it should deprive him of life

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy9R3F3oKk79BqSIqli_qxbRxY9SKjLthUlLBkk9N5TM4WzW4TnrSzh0UvMxCbdG23YBhGFLSj2cso1uC63sH8yeYsVmR2zmDosNEWj2rdd9T_-OK0Ov3L4P2R0uBf6MWsu-ZyHFQ=w615-h900-v0

fabda676-e1f6-4bc7-b716-d80fab6d56cf

THE GLORY OF GOD. 389 

by death, but rather that it should restore life to him in greater 

measure, and thus be to the greater glory of God. So S. Augustine : 

"It is not to death," he says, "because death itself is not to death, 

but rather to the giving occasion for a miracle, by the performing 

of which men may believe in Christ, and avoid the true death." 

Thirdly, it is not to death, that is, to such a death as is usually 

common to men, namely, that man should remain in it nor return 

any more to this life and this world : for although death might separate 

the soul of Lazarus from his body, yet it did not end this world [for 

him] so that he should not return to it ; which is the thing death 

does. For he was speedily raised up again by Christ, and returned 

to life more living and vigorous than before. So S. Chrysostom, 

Cyril, Theophylact, Euthymius, and others. Whence Nonnus renders, 

/'/ is not to everlasting death. 

Butfor the glory of God. By glory, first, Andreas Cretensis under-

stands the Cross and death of Christ; for this the envious Jews 

determined upon because of His raising up Lazarus, and this greatly 

glorified Christ. Secondly, Theodorus takes it of the glory which 

was to come to Christ because of the publicity and fame throughout 

all Judea, and indeed through the whole world, of this raising of 

Lazarus performed by Him. Thirdly, and rightly, take the glory of 

God, because men seeing Lazarus raised up by Christ, believed on 

Him as the Messiah and Son of God, and therefore glorified both 

Christ and God the Father. For so John explains this glory in 

ver. 45 : Many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the 

things which Jesus did, believed on Him. Whence S. Augustine, 

" Such a glorifying did not exalt Him, but profited us." 

Ver. 5. 

 

Now Jesus loved Martha, &c. Because of the singular 

love, devotion, and liberality with which they used to provide for 

Jesus and His disciples, for Martha had hospitable care for Jesus. 

Mary having been healed and converted by Christ, devoted herself 

wholly to Him, and indeed used to accompany Him when He 

went from town to town preaching, and ministered to Him of her 

substance (S. Luke viii. 2, 3). Lazarus imitated his sisters. John 

here inserts the mention of the love of Jesus, not so much that he

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw-RIry23gDzICIGZj1uIEEQNpbDmFEzrQuswbvCJCudLDrXRCxHUP-IQRqPNE5PIbdJ1B6pm-_-D0sr9b_FB-Od-iNc0g0BLUoAFXlEn4uGYu3YhHa6n27MAiLP07ETwhWz11y=w615-h900-v0

4f02a306-b6f6-4204-a5cc-959a43a051e6

390 S. JOHN, C. XI. 

may assign that cause for the sickness of Lazarus, as Cyril thinks, 

as if Jesus sent the sickness to Lazarus, because He loved him and 

his sisters, according to Rev. iii. 19, " As many as I love I 

rebuke and chasten ; " but to signify that Jesus, after He had received 

the news of the sickness of Lazarus, plainly had a fixed purpose to 

heal him, but in suitable time and way. For His love made Him 

anxious respecting the welfare of Lazarus, and therefore He did all 

things which John narrates in order. Finally, Jesus so loved Lazarus 

and his sisters, that on their account He raised Lazarus from death, 

even although He knew that the raising of Lazarus would be to 

Himself the cause of the Cross and death. The life therefore of 

Lazarus was the death of Christ. 

Ver. 6.— When he had heard, &c. He remained therefore in the 

same place for two days, during which Lazarus died, because He 

willed not to cure a sick man, but to raise one dead, and even 

four days buried and decaying ; which was a far greater benefit and 

miracle, and was not open to the calumnies of the Jews, who might 

say that Lazarus was not truly dead, and therefore not raised, but 

only in a swoon or faint, from which he recovered, not by the help 

of Christ, but by the force of nature and youth.' 

Ver. 7. 

 

Then after that saith He to His disciples, Let us go into 

Judea again. By thus forewarning, Christ calms the fears of His timid 

disciples ; for they feared to return with Him into Judea, because 

the Jews had a little before sought to stone Him (x. 31). So S. 

Chrysostom : " Never at any other time did the Lord announce to 

His disciples whither He was about to go ; but here they were 

greatly afraid of being harassed should He set out without warning. 

They feared both for Him and for themselves, for they were not 

strong in the faith." S. Augustine says : " Christ departed, as a 

man, from Judea, that He might not be stoned : but in returning, 

forgetful of His weakness, He showed His power." 

Ver. 8.—His disciples say, &c. The disciples say this, because 

they feared the Jews on account of Christ, and still more for them-

selves. 

Ver. 9,—/esus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day ?

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAx453AlmaBt9JXXTDriGwR457QORMJLTC2YOvVoyHZHVyqw1Z6QwjczNpIrb6a5hsRFJ6d9W8hRBjN-vAogoL8TM7wg2fNp4fIADTWmWa0OtCxDM4tmXB5svKSBRrMCOFPyOqTyyA=w615-h900-v0

0efacb94-4c8e-4838-a704-4c7990e3e4e5

MEANING OF THE "TWELVE HOURS." 391 

Lyra and those who follow him expound thus, as if it were " As the 

twelve hours change through the day, and the breezes change 

with them, so the minds of the Jews may easily be changed, that 

those who before hated Me may now love and receive Me ! 

" 

Secondly, S. Augustine, Bede, and Rupertus : " As the twelve hours 

follow the day, that is, the course of the sun, so that they succeed 

each other in turn, so it is your duty to follow Me ; for I am as it 

were your sun and day, but ye accompany Me as the twelve hours." 

And the Gloss : " Christ calls Himself the day, in which they 

ought to walk, that they may not stumble, and without whom if 

they walk they stumble ; as the disciples just now did in being 

unwilling that He should die, who came to die for men; but 

them He calls hours, because these follow the day." 

Thirdly, S. Cyril, as if: "Some hours of My day, that is, of My 

life, shall remain, in which it behoves Me to preach and to benefit 

the Jews : the night will come, that is, My Passion and Death 

; 

because of which I shall encompass them in the shades of 

slaughter and calamity : for night is the symbol of wrath and 

calamities." 

Fourthly and rightly : Certain and fixed is the period of day, 

that is, of twelve hours, within which any one may walk without 

stumbling, because he has the light by which he sees and avoids 

obstacles : so and with equal certainty the time of My life is fixed 

by God the Father, in which I have to live and do the works which 

I have been sent to perform. This therefore I call the day ; and 

in this I have no danger to fear from the Jews for Myself or for 

you, nor can I be slain before the time foreordained for Me by My 

Father ; that is, before the setting and night of My life shall come. 

If any man walk, &c. 

Ver. io. 

 

But if a man walk in the night, &c. While it is day, 

that is, while the time of life remains to Me, ye will not stumble, 

O disciples, while following Me into Judea ; but when the night 

shall have come, that is, death and the close of My life, then the 

Jews will persecute and kill you as My disciples, as they have 

persecuted and killed Me. So Rupertus. Mystically, he who

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzVY-04ne9bA8e6IppU-pmierxAQu5a6oZTSnH_RupsHKg9HmnwvDYI7XDt3l31dNany6OqLfr30KCRFpd66x0BpBjqxQd4sJV6ndzwOThAHe_wj06A-d-wg4iKqo4qXTvQE4jMGg=w615-h900-v0

f3ce19e2-f3b9-442e-b76f-42c4a777cc7f

392 S. JOHN, C. XT 

follows the day, that is, the sun and light of faith and grace, does 

not stumble, does not fall into offences ; but he who walks in the 

night, that is, in the darkness of ignorance and concupiscence, he 

falls into various faults and penalties. Eph. v. 8. 

Ver. ii.— These things said He, &c. He calls death sleep, because 

Lazarus was soon to be aroused and awakened from it. Hear S. 

Augustine : To the Lord, who called him from the sepulchre with as 

much ease as thou callest one sleeping from his bed, he was merely 

asleep ; to men, who were not able to raise him up, he was dead. So 

Paul calls the dead who are to rise again, sleepers (i Thess. iv. 14). 

Ver. 12. 

 

Then said His disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. 

For in the sick sleep is usually the sign and forerunner, and often the 

cause, of health. The sense is as if it were said, Let us suffer him 

to sleep, that he may the more quickly recover : wherefore there is 

no reason that we should go to him. So S. Augustine and Cyril. 

Ver. 13 HowbeitJesus spake of his death, &c. Because they took 

the "sleepeth" simply, not symbolically, of death, as Christ meant it, 

Ver. 14. Then saidJesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. He showed Himself to be a prophet, yea, the Son of God, inasmuch as 

He reveals things secret and distant : for such was this death of 

Lazarus, which He here clearly declares, to take away the disciples' 

error as to his sleep. For the messenger had announced to Christ 

only his sickness, not his death. 

Ver. 15. And L am glad for your sakes that I was not there. 

Christ therefore declaring his death, showed that He knew it not in 

a human manner, but in a Divine. For how, says Augustine, should 

the thing be hidden from Him who had created the man who was 

dying ? and into whose hands his soul had gone forth ? Nevertheless 

let us go unto him. Christ speaks of the dead as though he were 

living, because He was about to make him so, by raising him from 

the dead. So Cyril. 

Ver. 16.— Then said Thomas, &c. Thomas was not doubly 

named, as if his first name had been Thomas, his second Didymus 

 

but they were one and the same : for the Hebrew word Thomas is 

the same as the Greek Didymus, that is, a twin.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy5mlG3l19x91uN_VNdDglSM-Sy2P0IxB-Z9kv4D_BAkLIUurU-KvUYxmkBKGDfYCvRRNSbh7Pp__KMNqXnRwJQnrIak9N3IzO-uOdJErttvJMtf-7jwFW4IaHBL11INLSmOXnf=w615-h900-v0

dc94893f-eb35-4676-b612-9f1143e98ff0

CHRIST'S SOLDURII, OR SOLDIERS. 393 

Let us also go, that we may die with Him. Not with Lazarus, as 

some will have it, for this seems foolish ; but with Christ, who a 

little before had said, Let us go to him. Thomas, says Bede, 

exhorts his companions beyond all, that they should go and die with 

Christ, in which his great constancy appears. (And the Interlin.) 

Behold the true disposition of loving souls, either to live with Him 

or to die with Him ; such as were the Soldurii among the Gauls, 

whose law and covenant in war was, either to conquer together or 

to die together, as Julius Caesar bears witness in his Commentaries 

(De Bell. Gall. 111. 22), whom S. Paul seems to have alluded to 

when he says, in 2 Cor. vii. 3, Ye are in our hearts to live and to 

die with you. Furthermore, that which S. Thomas says, Let us also 

go, that we may die with Him, is as if he had said, " If we go with 

Jesus, we must die with Him, because of the violent hatred of the 

Jews towards Him. If then He goes, let us also go, as brave dis-

ciples and soldiers, and die with Him courageously as our Leader 

; 

if He disregards death, and even advances to meet it, let us also dis-

regard it and meet it." For he had not sufficiently understood what 

Christ (ver. 9) intimates, that no danger threatened Him yet from 

the Jews. So Cyril. Therefore he offers himself for Christ to cer-

tain death, for he considered it was impending ; which was a remark-

able proof of his great bravery, and singular love for Christ. 

Ver. 17. 

 

Then when Jesus came [to Bethany, as some Greek 

Codices add] Hefound that he had lain in thegravefour days already. 

That is, he had been buried four days ago. For the messenger 

respecting the illness of Lazarus came from the sisters to Jesus (says 

Chrysostom) on the day on which Lazarus died ; the two following 

days Jesus remained in Bethabara ; on the fourth day He went at 

length to Bethany. Therefore Lazarus seems to have died and been 

buried on the same day on which the sisters sent a messenger to 

Jesus ; for otherwise Lazarus would not have been four days dead 

and buried when Christ came, as is here said. 

More probably, Euthymius and Maldonatus think that Lazarus 

died indeed on the day on which the messenger came to Christ, but 

was buried on the following day, lest perhaps there might remain in

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxS-orLhRCk90er5ILGK47yz20hxP53DU6RBu2K7fkLBkoL6hHZAyX-jbFWIO-edHi2rcbJX_Gavc8rbivFlhDuknH_SrMcVUTZ6V0gMNmE5l9kwjrVRKMg442sLCFYYfVVXRsEgQ=w615-h900-v0

1664900f-9a6c-4f72-9798-095ee7566a01

394 S. JOHN, C. XI. 

him some signs of hidden life ; that Christ remained two days in 

Bethabara, and on the fourth day departed thence towards Bethany-

but because this journey was one of about ten hours, it could scarcely 

have been traversed by Christ and the apostles in one day on foot 

 

hence Christ reached Bethany on the following morning, which was 

the fifth from the burial of Lazarus and then raised him from the 

dead ; for neither was it becoming that he should be raised in the 

evening (lest it might seem a fancied and illusive raising), but in the 

morning, or in full day. Wherefore Lazarus had already been four 

complete days in the tomb or sepulchre, and the fifth from his burial 

was begun ; so that it might well appear to all that he was not only 

dead, but decaying and devoured by worms. Hence the raising of 

Lazarus performed by Christ was a most certain and wonderful 

miracle, which could in no way be hidden, or carped at by the 

scribes. 

Typically, one buried four days is a sinner having the habit of sin-

ning, who is dead in sin and as it were buried in it, and lies past 

cure, without hope of forgiveness and spiritual life. For the first 

day is that in which any one sins by the consent of the will. The 

second, on which any one completes the sin in act. The third, on 

which he repeats it again and again, and brings upon himself a 

custom and habit of it. The fourth, on which this habit becomes 

obstinate, and is, as it were, turned into nature ; according to S. 

Augustine {Confess., Lib. viii.), "Out of the perverted will a lust is 

formed ; and when the lust is served, it becomes a custom; and 

when the custom is not resisted, it becomes a necessity, and thus 

being connected together by certain (as it were) cramps, they formed 

what I have called a chain, and a hard slavery held me bound. 

Such a sinner, then, is by the great and rare grace of Christ to be 

raised from this sepulchre again ; which, that Christ might signify, 

He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.'" 

So also S. Augustine {On the Sermon of the Lord on the Mount) : 

"As we come to sin by three degrees, by suggestion, by delectation, 

by consent ; so also of the sin itself there are three differences 

 

in heart, in action, in custom—three deaths, as it were. One, so to

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzNr9sJzEyJvxxsvwF9FPBgk_o46N-3w-q9XmgmbB2BBhFKiGNR6CopCTIXIqjDUX9CfwvGLE2Po0N9jPdlLiHWZLJ50R7sJTLFv8pZuOaE4Z5wjAiZOprciC-ClX6mTZv11_6G=w615-h900-v0

0bbc1cc6-67f0-4598-acf1-6062cae99bac

DIFFERENT KINDS OF DEAD. 395 

speak, in the house, when in the heart consent is given to the desire 

 

a second, now carried forth, as it were, beyond the door, when consent 

goes on into action ; a third, when the mind, being weighed down 

by the force of evil custom, as it were by a mass of earth, is, so to 

speak, already decaying in the grave. And whosoever has read the 

Gospels recognises that the Lord has raised up these three kinds of 

dead. And he perhaps considers what differences there were in 

the word itself of Him who raised them : in one place. " Maiden, 

arise," and in another, " Young man, I say unto thee, Arise ; " and 

in another, He groaned in spirit, and wept, and again He groaned, 

and then afterwards He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth ! 

Thirdly, the Gloss, out of S. Augustine and Bede. The first day 

of death is that in which we are born with original sin. The 

second, that in which, coming to years of discretion, we transgress 

the natural law. The third, in which we despise the written law. 

The fourth, in which we disdain also the Gospel of Christ and 

His grace. Contrariwise, S. Bernard takes the four days for the 

four motives and actions of a penitent ; the first of fear ; the 

second of conflict against sins ; the third of grief; and the fourth 

of shame for the same. 

Ver. 18. 

 

Now Bethany was nigh, &c. A stadium is the eighth 

part of an Italian mile, and contains therefore 125 paces. John adds 

this to signify that many had come to Bethany from Jerusalem, 

inasmuch as it was so near, that they might comfort Martha and 

Mary, who were sorrowing for the death of Lazarus. 

And many of the Jews came, &c. Many, especially relations, 

connections, friends ; for these sisters were rich, noble, honoured, 

such as are accustomed to have many, either friends or dependent 

followers. Besides, the grief for a brother's death is very keen, and 

many, even strangers, and not known, are accustomed to assemble 

for the purpose of comforting persons under such a loss. For the 

grief for death is common to all ; and in it the consolation of all is 

common also. 

Ver. 20.—Then Martha, as soon as she heard, &c. At leisure for 

silence, grief, and prayer, according to her custom ; wherefore the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyrQPdV0Xu59FULPc4Fhwvav57S5OBLTqkbq5xlDVyLq8Q9wdMlGC1Ow4_SL7TzCWH3QJT7HUSfIzeOdYcZ2OF89FYcuOnYXyB18SHRe2cgORyNyXKZWTVhdgTztOJajzbck88-SQ=w615-h900-v0

b13f0bc3-367d-4504-8afc-fbd811481c70

396 S. JOHN, C. XI. 

news of the coming of Christ reached not Mary but Martha, for 

Martha was the senior, and was over the house, and was active and 

busy, wherefore all letters and messengers were first brought to her, 

not to Mary. But why did not she herself signify the coming of 

Christ to Mary ? I reply, first, because the near approach of Christ 

did not allow of any delay. For Christ seems to have been near the 

house when Martha met Him. Secondly, because Martha wished 

to confer secretly with Christ, that she might find out from Him 

whether there were any hope of raising up or helping her brother. 

Thirdly, because Mary, as I have said, was given to quiet and 

prayer. Fourthly, because, if she had called out Mary, all the Jews 

would have followed her, and a tumult would have arisen ; they would 

have contended and disputed with Christ. So Leontius. Finally, 

her joy at the approach of Christ drew her at once to meet Him, 

so that she did not think of calling her sister. I prefer to say this, 

rather than what some suppose, that she desired to deprive her sister 

of this commendation, viz. [of going to meet] the coming of Christ, 

for this appears to me too foolish and womanish, and unworthy of 

so holy a heroine. 

Ver. 21. 

 

Then said Martha unto Jesus, &c. Because I know 

Thee to be so powerful, that Thou art able to drive away death, and 

to love both him and us so well, that Thou wouldest not have per-

mitted him to die. In her grief, says Chrysostom, she silently, but 

reverently, seems to blame Christ for coming too late. But rather 

in fact she accuses herself, that she had not sent the messenger 

sooner to Christ ; or generally, she bewails and laments His absence, 

as we lament a casual absence of the physician, if, while he is absent, 

death takes place. 

Ver. 22. But 1 know that even now, whatsoever Thou wilt ask of 

God, God will give it Thee. And consequently, if Thou shouldest 

beg of God the raising again of Lazarus, although he has been four 

days in the tomb, God will give it Thee. " She thought," says Cyril, 

" that Christ came, not that He might raise up Lazarus, but that He 

might comfort her and Mary ; and therefore she begs of Him that 

He will raise Lazarus, but indirectly, and with a modest and humble

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwE6IIKLucRmYt1NcrvaheLFRBrmrVt41AZDL4HofQ97MGyBw-kLvgnpgV1xvttSwDE7x7_RojPR5elOg-gMyUDoAIEBhfrWSCo0VjRJA0Mx6E6RTpIgPWaFEs22JUPqJ2iqiFP3w=w615-h900-v0

30efc232-77e0-484f-ae17-fcd02ee9b58d

GOD HELPS THE HELPLESS. 397 

resignation of her will to His." Whence, as S. Augustine notes, she 

did not say : But now I pray Thee to raise my brother ; for whence 

should she know whether it were good for her brother to rise again ? 

This only she said, I know that Thou art able ; do this, if Thou 

wilt; but whether Thou wilt do it or not is a matter for Thy judg-

ment, not for my presumption to determine. 

Hence learn by way of moral, that God often suffers us to fall into 

tribulations, and allows them to increase unto the utmost, and then 

powerfully helps us, that He may show His Omnipotence and pro-

vidential mercy. Wherefore the faithful Christian must not then 

despair, but increase in hope, and pray the more earnestly. For 

when every human help fails, then the Divine help approaches and 

is very near. For so God helped Abraham when placed in diffi-

culties (Gen. xx.), and Joseph, forgotten in prison (Gen. xli. 14). 

Also when the Hebrews were oppressed by Pharaoh (Exod. i.), and 

especially when the same people were everywhere surrounded ; on 

one side by the sea, on the other by the mountains, and elsewhere 

by the army of Pharaoh. Then He divided the Red Sea and led 

them safely through, while Pharaoh, pursuing them through the bed 

of the sea, was overwhelmed with his whole army (Exod. xiv.) So 

in the time of the Judges, He permitted the same people to be 

oppressed, now by the Midianites, now by the Moabites, now by the 

Ammonites, now by the Philistines, that He might bring them to 

fervent prayer, and to appeal to Him ; and when they did this, He 

sent them Gideon, Ehud, Samson, and other Judges to free them. 

So He freed, by means of Judith, the Jews destined to death by 

Holofernes, and those by Haman He freed through Mordecai, and 

those by Antiochus through the Maccabees. So He freed David 

besieged in the cave by Saul, a messenger being sent to Saul that 

the Philistines were laying waste Judea (1 Sam. xxiii. 24). It is 

therefore the proper attribute of God to supply the defect of nature, 

and so also to help the lost and hopeless, according to the saying : 

" The poor committeth Himself unto Thee ; Thou art the helper of 

the fatherless" (Ps. x. 14). 

Ver. 23.—Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. Jesus

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxEAdg3-rzBREHSiUHfIwjuQLhZ2nSONK8SCnfGiQrvqSnWZ0NQXwrb7DbT0tSsxqz6HJBa8kfsj2FNBrZv6dZh7CJevwvUnHZAZgMmiJR0MnyO8zu8fUlarQApmxu0p2pzzUtkFQ=w615-h900-v0

bd4dfcbd-4f7a-4d37-8156-b1c25afaca00

398 s. John, c. xi. 

solaces Martha sorrowing for the death of her brother, by a hope of 

his resurrection, but an ambiguous one, that He might raise her by 

degrees to faith and hope of so great a miracle as that by which He 

was soon to raise him, so that she might dispose herself to it, and, as 

it were, merit it. So Leontius. 

Ver. 24.—Martha saith unto Him, I know, &c. Christ had said 

that Lazarus should rise again, not explaining whether now, or in 

the day of judgment. Martha, then, to elicit an explanation of this 

ambiguity from the mouth of Christ, adds, / know that he shall rise 

again in the day ofjudgment ; but this will not be any benefit peculiar 

to him, but the common lot of all men. But if he shall rise before 

that time, and be raised by Thee now, this will be a singular privilege 

to him and to us all ; and I would that Thou wouldest say the word 

openly. Learn hence, that the Jews, and especially the Pharisees, 

believed in the immortality of the soul, and from thence the resur-

rection of the body ; and this appears from 2 Mace. xii. 44, Job 

xix. 26. 

Ver. 25.—-Jesus said unto her, lam the Resurrection and the Life. I 

am He who recalls to life, I am He who gives life ; by Me both the 

dead rise and the living live ; therefore I am able now, immediately, 

before the general resurrection, to raise up thy brother from death. 

Whence S. Augustine : She says, My brother shall rise again in the last 

day. Thou sayest truly ; but He by whom he shall then rise is able 

[to raise him] also now, because He is the Resurrection and the Life: 

that is, Christ saith, " L am the cause of the Resurrection and Life, 

so that all rise again by Me, and no one except by Me can rise." 

Others explain thus, " I am the resurrection to life," which is an 

hendiadys. He that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall 

he live. 

To Martha asking that the life of the body should be restored to 

Lazarus, Christ replies more fully, and assigns assuredly life also to 

the soul ; so that his soul should live here a new life by greater 

grace, and in the future by glory. "The soul shall live," says 

Augustine, " until the body shall rise again, never afterwards to die ! 

 

The sense then is, " Not only thy brother shall rise again by My

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwc-HwdnbHApuI3qUGw8ro-xpvEe6WFdpIrtdFW-MAR8yCeUD2trG7bO_FtK4DeMcnHyZ9QWzzmlcHPH0AlAplC8uEEfaii7kwX5rjGdwPTb-FC9mHgi0o-V4CAolh4w3EMHG4c=w615-h900-v0

87df5832-af5e-4bad-9d6e-57c084687d91

FAITH REQUIRED. 399 

power, but whosoever is faithful, who believes in Me with a living 

faith, working by love, shall live even though he were dead: as 

well because his soul shall live always by Me a life of love and 

grace, and of glory in heaven ; as because his body shall be raised 

by Me from death to a life blessed and eternal in the day of judg-

ment ; " to which Christ here chiefly alludes. Wherefore, although 

it (the body) may die, yet this will be for a short time only, so that 

death will seem not so much death as sleep and repose ; from which 

it shall awake and arise on the day of judgment. 

S. Cyprian (£>e Mortalit.) cites this place and explains : "If we 

believe in Christ, let us have faith in His words and promises ; and 

since we shall not die for ever, let us come in glad security to Christ, 

with whom we shall live and reign for ever." 

Ver. 26. 

 

And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. 

I, as I will raise up the faithful, though dead, to a new and blessed 

life, so those also who are still alive, who believe in Me, I will keep 

in life eternal, and I will provide that they shall not die for ever : for 

although from the debt of nature they shall die for a brief time, yet 

I will soon raise them up from death to life eternal, so that they 

shall seem not so much to die as to sleep. Wherefore I am the 

Resurrection and the Life of all the faithful whether dead or living, 

because I will bestow upon them eternal life through the resur-

rection. 

Believest thou this? Christ requires faith in the Resurrection, 

not from Lazarus, inasmuch as he was dead, but from his sister 

Martha, so that she may be at once excited to greater trust in it and 

hope for it, and therefore may prepare herself for it with greater 

desire and reverence. So Christ required from the father who 

begged that his son should be freed from the evil spirit, that he 

should believe Him to be able to do this (S. Mark ix. 23) ; and 

from those who carried the paralytic He required a similar faith 

(S. Matt. ix. 2). 

Ver. 27. 

 

The Christ, the Son of God, that is, that Son, viz., 

the true and only Son by nature. Christ perfected the imperfect 

faith of Martha, saying, / am the Resurrection and the Life. Where-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwbSMWxgRHd93OKfH2R-rJr_mbtQybsR6odKeCQ9AImTycEwVZeUo9IlJ-OSIaUcX7F7piIy9LNBS1OlcGdNt-6I_0WvTzqI6fIAoIXQ2Jzen0ZHAhC3xlaxpy2yIZ1CQDvE7o4=w615-h900-v0

2006e8f9-5845-4cd4-8d77-2464b3018f61

400 S. JOHN, C XI. 

fore she, being thus enlightened by Christ, burst forth into a perfect 

act of faith, and said : I believe that Thou art Messiah, the true Son 

of God, and therefore God, the first cause of all life and resurrection. 

I believe that Thou, as God, art therefore able to raise up and give 

life to Lazarus and to whomsoever of the dead Thou wiliest. 

Ver. 2%.—And when she had so said, &c Secretly, because Mary 

was surrounded with the Jews who were condoling with her. 

Martha therefore calls her in private, lest she might excite a tumult 

of the Jews, if she should call Mary openly and say that Jesus was 

there. Theophylact says somewhat differently : " The presence of 

Christ constitutes a calling. For His presence in itself summoned 

Mary, as love calls the lover to the loved." 

Vers. 29, 30. 

 

As soon as she heard that, &c. Because Jesus 

wished to go to the sepulchre of Lazarus, which, according to the 

manner of the Jews, was outside the village or town : hence He did 

not wish to enter Bethany, because He would have to quit it again 

to go to the sepulchre. Therefore He remained outside, and there 

awaited Mary. 

Ver. 31. 

 

Followed her. The Providence of God ordained that 

very many Jews following Mary should see Jesus raising Lazarus, 

and should therefore be irrefragable witnesses of his being raised 

from the dead ; and should thus believe in Jesus, and bring others 

to believe likewise. 

Then when Mary was come, &c. She fell at His feet from reve-

rence and gratitude, inasmuch as once bedewing them with her 

tears and drying them with her hair, she had heard Him say, Thy 

sins are forgiven thee; go in peace (S. Luke vii. 38). But she says 

the same thing as her sister Martha, because they had the same 

sense of grief, the same faith, and therefore the same words 

; 

yet she 

says less than Martha, who was not hindered by tears, had said. 

(Bede.) 

Ver. 33.— When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, &c. You will 

ask, of what nature was the groaning and trouble of Christ ? 

First, Eusebius Emissenus, or rather Gallus : He groaned that He might teach us to groan over sinners. {Infremuit) that is, He groaned:

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxS7B6E-DslpDRuVJ7GTBGIfJGPvDzLlWyQBX_e0PjdrmlRxifbn_8iW63cYPXRN6i4iBjPQIxdzVnCIt-LY4MSytUF-kXrZFTj0wfZdzZQHIxPK30ouPg2HkeH81LdzecKAQ0Gag=w615-h900-v0

06ef209f-c26c-45d9-9daf-e5b1eb1b1a71

SORROW OF JESUS. 40I 

But the groan is of one who pities, the murmur of one who is indig-

nant. Nonnus translates agitated or disturbed by His fatherly mind. 

But this is too general, nor does it explain what or of what nature 

this trouble was. 

Secondly, Theophylact by spirit understands Divinity; as if it 

were said, Jesus by His Spirit, i.e., by His Divinity, powerfully and 

as if by groaning, repressed His tears and the feeling of commise-

ration which was aroused in Him because of the lamentation of 

Mary and of the Jews, lest bursting forth into tears, and sobbing 

like others, He might speak in a voice weak and tearful, such as 

would be unfitting one so grave and holy. 

To this agree S. Chrysostom and others, who by "murmur" 

understand the feeling of anger, indignation, and wrath which Christ, 

putting as it were a force upon Himself, mastered and repressed 

with a serene and firm countenance His feeling of commiseration 

and the tears ready to flow : as if it were said, Christ threatened 

and restrained His spirit and His human nature, that it should not 

yield to weeping. But against this is, first, that this feeling of 

compassion had plainly not yet been aroused when Christ groaned, 

but a little after, when He was troubled. Secondly, because in 

Christ these passions and affections were not involuntary and violent, 

but freely and voluntarily assumed, as I shall soon state. 

I say then, that Christ here displayed the feeling and act of 

murmuring (A. V groaning), that is, of indignation in spirit or 

mind and the innermost perceptions of the soul, when by sign and 

murmur, or indignant voice, He signified outwardly the grief which 

He felt arising from the death of Lazarus, and from the sobbing 

of Mary and the Jews : and that by this murmur He, as it were, 

prepared and animated Himself to the arduous combat with death, 

that He might signify how difficult would be the raising of Lazarus 

from the grave after four days' dwelling there. Whence S. Augustine 

says : In the voice of indignation appears the hope of resurrection 

; 

in truth Jesus foresaw that He because of the raising up of Lazarus 

would be crucified by the envious Pharisees 

; 

yet not allowing this 

to stand in the way, He determined to raise him up; which act of 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAywtdVnvjajSz_WGyIxFjEnzvaoqZKuR-qosQJTHElfezVJK6qWN_RzXEYRKyt_XhkGlGehWi6v0Ybkw1NUcSkk4boGtqko0o4aiVmvbaCMQuM-Y-VbgreKls2PPSrydEVZlh91pQ=w615-h900-v0

eaaf0a7c-c8fc-411e-815f-07aaa9d645b7

4°2 S. JOHN, C. XI. 

heroic fortitude He allowed to be manifested in this groan. So 

soldiers groan when battle is near, and excite and sharpen their 

anger for the difficult and perilous combat that is imminent ; foi 

their anger is the whetstone of valour and bravery. Hence also 

we, when temptation, whether of the devil, the flesh, and the world, 

threatens, should sharpen our anger against them, that we may 

overcome the temptation ; for by anger is concupiscence overcome, 

though the difficulty of the task be great. Further, this murmur, 

that is, indignation, was against death, and the devil, by whose envy 

death had entered into the world ; which had been the cause of 

such bitter sorrow and lamentation. 

And was troubled (Gr. and Vulg. He troubled Himself). That 

is, He permitted freely and willingly to Himself the strong feeling 

both of indignation, as already mentioned, and of commiseration 

and tears, because of the common lamentation of Martha, Mary, 

and the rest ; for it would have been inhuman not to grieve and 

sympathise with them. For them therefore Jesus was troubled. 

Note these passions of indignation, sorrow, commiseration, and 

weeping, were in such a manner in Christ as not to overbear His 

reason and will, or to arise unbidden as they are aroused with us 

 

but rather to follow His reason, and to be ruled and excited by it. 

On which account right reason always used to direct and regulate 

them. Therefore [S. John] says, He troubled Himself (turbavil 

Seipsum) ; not, He was troubled. Wherefore these passions were in 

Christ not so much passions as feelings in place of passions, freely 

taken, as divines teach, out of Damascene. For Christ was able as 

He chose to excite them, to soften, to moderate, to rule, to direct, 

much more completely than a charioteer does his horses and his 

chariot. 

He troubled therefore himself: putting on the feeling of grief, anger, 

and compassion, and showing it by a change of voice and coun-

tenance because of grief. Therefore the proper cause of this 

murmur and trouble of Christ was the death of Lazarus, and the 

weeping of Mary and the Jews, as appears from the verses them-

selves. The misery therefore of Lazarus and of all men excited the

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxHxYwesYeu5kk7tgxgwTWubTe6BoJ5CR0Atf55fjPVttYm7mbEBbvYWunW1jBTP2KPXjFBOeE4URSTyCUVeDMpUgzoSv7yiHZF-5XjCVkcCuBq42x-tNGQjXEPy9gOEtHaDmX3mw=w615-h900-v0

7914209e-731b-4390-b49c-c358447a8c8e

CHRIST BECAME ALL THINGS TO ALL. 403 

pity of Christ, the pity excited indignation against such troubles, 

the indignation increased the pity, and at the same time with it 

aroused zeal, and a purpose of taking away those troubles, even 

with the casting away of His own life by the death upon the Cross, 

by which so great a benefit was alone to be purchased, according 

to what Isaiah says (Ixiii. 4), "The day of vengeance is in my 

heart and my fury it upheld me." 

Ver. 34. 

 

And said, Where have ye laid him, &c. Christ knew 

the place where Lazarus was buried : for, as S. Augustine argues, 

Didst thou know that he was dead, and art ignorant where he is 

buried ? Yet He asked the question ; because He acted with men 

after a human manner, and by the inquiry prepared Himself, and 

cleared the way for the raising up of Lazarus ; and excited the atten-

tion at once of Mary, Martha, and the Jews, so that they should 

watchfully consider the words and actions of Christ, who was about 

to raise him. 

Symbolically, S. Gregory says : Christ recalling to the women 

the sin of Eve, says, " I have placed the man in Paradise whom ye 

have placed in the tomb." 

Come and see. Eagerly they invite Jesus to come and see, hoping 

that He who had raised up strangers' dead, would raise up also 

Lazarus His intimate associate, who was so beloved by Him. 

Whence, mystically, the Gloss : " See, that is pity 

; 

" for, as S. Augus 

tine says, the Lord sees when He pities, according to this, " Look 

upon my adversity, and forgive me all my sins." S. Chrysostom, and 

after him Theophylact : He seemed to them about to go thither that 

He might weep, not that He might raise up [the dead]. 

Ver. 35.—Jesus wept. At seeing the sepulchre of Lazarus 

(although Chrysostom supposes that He wept when He groaned 

and was troubled, which is equally probable), to signify His love for 

him, and the grief He felt at his death. 

Secondly, that He might weep with the sisters and the Jews who 

were weeping, and teach us to do the same. So S. Augustine. 

Hear S. Ambrose : " Christ became all things to all men 

; 

poor to 

the poor, rich to the rich, weeping with the weeping, hungering

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAymWQXhvJIy17sFziPbk9dU5Hri0x5uYhy8ScdkvT2paCHpj6alA5euvEcGf_RXWy_qEt4AmmllrfauIxJb4Bhf9mKD70uUZW__jgGiHRNh9SxbhQ1tEjOJYmXKQC8e--gV-M1whA=w615-h900-v0

ac07ea4c-eaa0-4914-8231-970fbfa69377

404 S. JOHN, C XI. 

with the hungry, thirsting with the thirsty, full with the abounding 

 

He is in prison with the poor man, with Mary He weeps, with the 

Apostles He eats, with the Samaritan woman he thirsts. 

Thirdly, that adding tears to His speech, He might make it 

stronger and more efficacious ; for tears are a sign of vehement grief 

and affliction, and also of desire and longing : wherefore God is accus-

tomed to hear and answer prayers seasoned, and as it were armed, 

with tears. So Christ on the [eve of the] Cross offering up prayers 

and supplications with strong crying and tears, was heard in that 

He feared. [E. & Heb. V. 7, pro sua reverentia, Vulg.] So Tobit 

(xii. 12) heard from S. Raphael, "When thou didst pray with tears 

[the words " with tears," cum lacrymis, are not in the LXX Greek], 

and didst bring the dead, I brought thy prayer before the 

Lord." So Jacob, wrestling with the angel, obtained a blessing 

(Gen. xxxii. 29). Wherefore ? because he wept and besought him 

(Hosea xii. 4). "The tears of penitents," says S. Bernard, "are the 

wine of angels." For it is the anguish of the mind in prayer which 

influences, and as it were compels God to pity, according as it is 

said, " a contrite and humble heart God shall not despise " (Ps. li. 

17) ; just as the tears of an infant influence the mother, and obtain 

from her what it asks ; for God shows toward us the heart of a 

mother. 

Other writers give different causes for the tears of Christ. First, 

Cyril says that Christ wept for the miseries of the human race 

brought in by sin. Secondly, Andrew Cretensis says that He wept 

for the unbelief of the Jews, and because they would not believe in 

Christ, even after they had seen the miracle of the raising of 

Lazarus. Thirdly, Isidore of Pelusium and Rupertus think that 

Christ wept for the very reason that he was about to recall Lazarus 

out of Limbo, that is, from the haven and state of peace, to the 

storms, dangers, and sufferings of this life. 

Further, we read that Christ wept thrice : here at the death of 

Lazarus 

; at the Cross (Heb. v. 7) ; at the sight of Jerusalem, and 

its impending ruin (Luke xix. 41). S. Bernard {Sermon 3, in Die Nativ.) says, " The tears ot Christ cause me shame and grief.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxXtoSvTBnQ9-l1hRH0tT-fX0GkpK3s7Nl0bvjWlPj8bOD6UkXF29F8UAqDc9AkEv04hfCf_WexJB3HeMpXsxwkRJVAvQTnvlEtbf1Xx_NB0otnzzsWG6r_9z2rSueUv45lsVPvlg=w615-h900-v0

58ee274e-55bf-4c9a-ae2e-8608854234bf

WHY JESUS WEPT. 405 

Can I still trifle, and deride His tears?" And soon after: "The 

Son of God sympathises (compatitur), and He weeps ; man suffers 

(patitur), and shall we laugh ? " And S. Augustine says : " Christ 

wept—let man weep for himself : wherefore did Christ weep, unless 

to teach man to weep ? Wherefore did He groan and trouble Him 

self, except that the faith of man, rightly displeased with himself, 

should in a manner groan in accusation of his evil works, so that 

the habit of sinning should yield to the violence of repenting." 

Ver. 37. 

 

And some of them said, Could not this man, &c. Cer-

tainly He was able to do that, but would not, because He had 

determined to do something far greater, namely, to raise him up 

when dead and four days buried, which the Jews thought impossible, 

and therefore wondered that Christ had not hindered the death of 

Lazarus. 

Ver. 38. Jesus therefore, again groaning in Himself, &c. Note 

that Christ was here thrice greatly distressed, and wept. First, when 

He sees Mary and the Jews weeping (ver. ^1). Secondly, when 

He saw the sepulchre of Lazarus (ver. 34). Thirdly, here, when He came to it, to show how pitiable was the lot of Lazarus when dead, 

and typically of sinners spiritually dead by their sins, and here-

after to die perpetually in the torments of hell. For it was they 

who drew forth from Him in the agony of His Passion tears ot 

blood (Luke xxii. 44). 

It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. For the more noble of the 

Jews were buried in caves or underground chambers, as appears in 

the case of the sepulchre of Abraham (Gen. xxiii. 9), Isaac and Jacob 

(Gen. xlix. 31), Joseph of Arimathea (Matt, xxvii. 60). 

Mystically, S. Augustine says : "This stone denotes the Mosaic 

Law, which was written on tables of stone, and included all under 

sin." 

Typically, the same says (Ser/n. 44, on S. John) : " That mass 

placed on the sepulchre is the force of evil custom with which the 

soul is weighed down, nor permitted to rise up nor breathe." 

Ver. 39.—Jesus said: Take ye away the stone. Jesus commanded 

this, first, that when the stone was taken away the Jews might both

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyCmNhWf-auxrsFDr9X-Bym2oJCdGLvR8JvhIbWoVTwg8emW6MmN9VAxmylCfn2ga-sjpYOpPVeILsud4H-C5LiWBe4dLtx-vNLHes5dMBwnxm9TQP3GXwx7M9aWOmw4iALlrVA6g=w615-h900-v0

faed7e00-43f9-4792-ba9a-df3cdad5cc77

406 s. joiiN, c xr. 

see the body of Lazarus, and smell that it was corrupted, and so 

think his raising a work of more power. Secondly, that He might 

speak in the presence of the body of Lazarus, and bringing it dead 

before God should obtain of Him that it be raised up. 

Typically, S. Bernard (Serm. 4, De Assump.) : " Let the stone be 

taken away, but let penitence remain, no longer weighing down and 

burdening the mind, but confirming and rendering it living and 

strong 

; 

yes, let its food be to do the will of the Lord, which before 

it knew not." So also training does not now constrain him who is 

free, as it is said, " The law is not made for the righteous ; but 

rules and directs one who pays it a voluntary obedience into the 

way of peace." 

Martha, the sister of him that was dead, &c. Mystically, S. 

Augustine says : " Lazarus four days dead signifies a sinner buried in 

the habit of sin, and as it were despaired of. The Lord then came, 

to whom in truth all things were easy, and yet made manifest a 

difficulty." 

He groaned in spirit. He showed there was need of blame and 

loud reproof to those who have become hardened by custom. Yet 

at the loud voice of the Lord the bonds of necessity have been 

broken ; the tyranny of hell trembled ; Lazarus is restored living. 

Truly the Lord frees also those who are four days dead by evil 

habit ; for Lazarus was sleeping to Christ when He willed to raise 

him. 

Ver. 40.—Jesus said unto her, &c. This is the same as " Thou 

shalt see My glory, I who am God and the Son of God." So 

Leontius and Euthymius. 

But where did Christ say this to Martha ? We answer, Christ 

said that not in precise words, but virtually and in effect He said it 

when the messengers were sent by Martha (ver. 4), when He said, 

" This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the 

Son of God might be glorified thereby." So S. Chrysostom. Again, 

and more clearly, to Martha herself, in verses 23 and 25. 

If thou wouldest believe. Christ arouses the wavering faith and hope of Martha ; for although she when she met Christ before had

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy_AbapR68QxNri61n15PM1CEiTY00S1q1h9ptKMrox_yeL9eFFVDKQzKIVhp1BMlTYAqwwD7cl4DGWMluUSKh-ZajtsadOgEjTgxX5MCKMKDxFPezaeuyFXZCNqFieQYq-RlUY=w615-h900-v0

6437197f-86e1-4e92-bade-13b592be6bef

Martha's faith totters. 407 

said, " I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God " (vers. 22 

and 27), yet when it came to the point, when I say, Christ, just 

about to raise up Lazarus, ordered the sepulchre to be opened, 

Martha began to totter ; wherefore she said, " Lord, by this time 

he stinketh, for he hath been dead four- days." She had therefore 

alternate impulses of grace and nature, of faith and distrust, of 

hope and despair, concerning the resurrection of Lazarus, such as 

we experience in ourselves : when looking to God we hope that we 

shall overcome all things, however difficult ; but when looking to 

our own infirmity, when we ought to advance against some diffi-

culty, we hesitate, we tremble, and almost disbelieve that it can be 

accomplished by us. So recruits before a battle show great bold-

ness, but when the battle commences, at the first onset of the 

enemy they fear and fly. Whence it is said : " In peace lions, in 

battle stags." But veteran soldiers before the battle tremble as 

stags, but in the battle they stand and fight as lions. By this 

difference you may distinguish the veteran from the tyro. 

Ver. 41. 

 

Then they took away the stone. Which being taken 

away, the corpse of Lazarus, fetid and decaying, appeared ; so that 

it was evident to all that he was really dead, and that Christ 

brought his very body, just as it was, before God by prayers, and 

presented it to be raised up. 

AndJesus lifted up His eyes. To God the Father, that He might 

teach us to raise our eyes and still more hearts to God in heaven 

when we pray. S. John Damascene (in Catena) adds, that Christ 

looked up to heaven, as to His own land, to signify that He had 

come thence upon earth. 

And said, Father, I thank Thee that Thou hast heard Me. Hence 

some think that Christ when He groaned in spirit (ver. 33) besought 

the Father, mentally, to raise up Lazr.rus, and received an answer 

from Him that Lazarus was to be raised up by Him; and that 

therefore Christ says here, / thank Thee that Thou hast heard Me. 

This is probable. 

But evidently it is as if He had said : I thank Thee, O Father, 

because Thou hast always and constantly hitherto heard Me when

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzweKWMT-oe66CUk5Qqi5mFWiZHGhG9gh2eaj2o9BbHw9HDvh2HRtZUwGIZUqVyWztUYkCwB-piwoxCPJCLQcaYRTbZdDt2QfJtjucQNuwUKffCA6X4etenwOdrnZ_DauoLq3cm6A=w615-h900-v0

c583c1b1-8f4a-489b-a31c-22c0b5a813b0

408 S. JOHN. C. XI. 

I prayed, and especially now, when, though silently and in the mind, 

I invoke and beseech Thee for the raising up of Lazarus ; for 

Thou didst grant to Me, that soon I shall raise him up. Hence 

Christ teaches us how to pray, that in the beginning of prayer we 

should surely thank God for benefits received. This giving of 

thanks conciliates God's favour to us, and inclines Him to bestow 

the new blessings which we beg for. For he who is grateful for the 

lesser gifts, merits to receive the greater. This is the faithful prayer 

of sons, whence Christ adds : 

Ver. 42. 

 

And I knew that Thou hearest Me always: but because, 

&c, i.e., what I said aloud (ver. 41). 

Ver. 43. And when He had thus spoken, &c. First, to show this 

voice to have great and prevailing authority, by which He was 

raising up Lazarus from death, as God ruling nature and death. 

Whence Cyril says, His command is kingly, and worthy of God: 

Lazarus, comeforth. For He said this not as praying, but as bidding 

and commanding. A loud voice, then, signifies the great force and 

power which recalled Lazarus from death to life. For this was 

a most difficult work, and therefore required supreme and Divine 

power, as also a fitting voice. Symbolically and mystically, the 

cause was, to represent with this loud voice the trumpet-voice of the 

Archangel in the day of judgment, by which all the dead shall be 

raised. Whence SS. Chrysostom, Cyril, Theophilus, Euthymius, 

assert that Christ here willed to show in action what He had said in 

v. 25, "The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear 

the voice of the Son of God, and they who hear shall live." Hear 

S. Ambrose (De Fide Resur.) : The Lord shows thee in what 

manner thou shalt rise. For He did not raise up one Lazarus 

only, but the faith of all ; and if, when thou readest, thou believest 

this, thy mind also, which was dead, receives life with that Lazarus. 

For what means it that the Lord drew near to the tomb, and cried 

with a loud voice : Lazarus, comeforth,—unless that He might afford 

us a specimen, might give us an example, of the future resurrec-

tion? Why did He cry aloud with His voice, as if He were not 

accustomed by His Spirit alone to perform [mighty works], as if He

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwOgPsRbt7U-Ns5u9ehPkobvvIZUJy1A6eZbyxZdCybP5sN9gBOTFaqcq46MhqQTo2JgqcjPAWc2K_P6I1-l2pUfTIaeUedZkdTY8pzsXTqDcTUSjPdjJ_qbfNMOh-KImqx6QxC4g=w615-h900-v0

d9118fa0-ef00-4905-a912-f2a1cec6c81e

THE LOUD VOICE OF CHRIST. 409 

were not accustomed to command without speech ? but that He 

might show what is written, "In the twinkling of an eye, at the last 

trump, the dead shall be raised incorruptible" (1 Cor. xv. 52). 

Typically, the loud voice of Christ signifies the great impulse ot 

arousing grace, by which the sinner needs to be called forth from 

the custom of evil in which he lies buried, to grace and a new life. 

So S. Augustine. Hence Eph. v. 14, "Awake thou that sleepest, 

and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life." 

Lazarus. He calls him by his proper name : lest, as says S. 

Ambrose, he might seem as one raised up for another, or his 

resurrection more by chance than by command. Again, He 

addresses the dead man as living, because all the dead live unto 

God, says S. Chrysostom. 

Comeforth. Not as if thou wert already risen, and only now wast 

to show thyself beyond the sepulchre, as Origen wrongly infers from 

hence : but, Rise, return from the dark and hidden caves of death 

and Hades ; return, O soul of Lazarus, from the farthest limits of 

the Limbus Pairum into this body, and thence into the life, air, and 

light common to all living beings. 

Ver. 44. 

 

And he that was dead came forth, &c. The power of the 

voice of Christ is made manifest, which instantly raised up the dead 

man, so that the things spoken might be done. 

Grave-clothes, bindings for the sepulchre, with which the hands 

and feet of the dead man are bound, so that they may be inserted 

and decently composed in a narrow receptacle. The Arabic trans-

lates linen cloths ; Nonnus, "he had his whole body from foot to 

head bound with manifold wrappings for the grave." 

And his face was bound about with a napkin : in the manner of 

the Jews, that the fact of death might be signified, and the pale and 

fearful visage of the dead might strike no one with horror. 

You will ask, Why did Christ, in raising the dead man, not at the 

same time unloose his bonds? 

SS. Augustine, Chrysostom, Cyril, Leontius, and others reply 

that the Jews might see that the same Lazarus was raised up, who 

a little before had been swathed as dead, by themselves, with those

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwYTPjsw11XKErm39UjRHeKMZwR27rCHFZOqHKHYQzVEB029aTSqEJ1MoCiW4oeZgtrXE2X2tKapVi_j1tQrt9v8tOFT6WQSodR1CRh9MBfcZDD1JTIMEc4PL0gXg7lwnd9aTXcjQ=w615-h900-v0

ef47f0d0-e9a9-460c-9a2f-ed9031b5c97a

4*0 S. JOHN, c. XI. 

bands and napkin, and was not a phantom, or some other man 

hidden in the sepulchre, to make a feigned appearance. 

Secondly, that the miracle was twofold : that the first was the 

raising up the dead man ; the second that he when raised up should 

immediately walk with his feet bound and his face covered, and come 

forth from his sepulchre straight to Jesus. 

Typically, S. Gregory : Our Redeemer raised up a maiden in the 

house, a young man outside the gate [of the city], but Lazarus in the 

sepulchre. So he lies as it were still dead in the house, who is 

secretly sunk in sin. He is, as it were, brought outside the gate, 

whose iniquity reveals itself even to the shamelessness of public 

commission. But he is weighed down with the mound of the grave, 

who in the committing of wickedness is loaded with the weight of 

habit. But these He pities and recalls to life, in that very often 

by Divine grace He enlightens with the brightness of His counte-

nance those dead not only in secret but even in open sins, and 

oppressed by the weight of evil custom. 

S. Augustine says : Lazarus going forth from the sepulchre is the 

soul drawing back from carnal vices, but bound, that is, not yet 

freed from pains and troubles of the flesh, while it dwells in the body; 

the face is covered with a napkin, for we cannot have full under-

standing of things in this life ; but it is said, " Loose him," for after 

this life the veilings are taken away, that we may see face to 

face. 

Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go. To his home. 

Jesus addressed this command to the Jews, that they, handling 

Lazarus, might as it were touch and handle with their hands the 

miracle that was wrought by Him, and [see] that he was raised up. 

Symbolically, Christ sends sinners bound with the bands of their 

sins to bishops and priests, that they may be released and absolved, 

saying, Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven 

(Matt, xviii. 18). So also S. Augustine. " What is it," he says, " to 

loose and let him go ? What ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed 

also in heaven." 

Finally, there is no doubt (though John is silent upon it) that

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAz9SqJmXFeFocJePFSz9ZDsC0cXTn6qXk1NX4y7dibF4V-O4VUEjJsMj3jDwiky-e_LTg9dOk4aqX0P9stsFsSe64swCnIeBrHJQnCIOKK_HYLbEkLc_N1hMiQTxxRgE0lw5ymo8g=w615-h900-v0

c59686e4-d261-4277-9f62-78832f7a1d00

MALICE OF fHE JEWS. 4tl 

Lazarus rendered great thanks to Christ ; and that he dedicated his 

life to Him from whom he had received it. He became a disciple, 

a preacher, and the Bishop of Marseilles. 

Ver. 45. 

 

Then many of theJews . believed on Him. For they 

were convinced by the evidence of the miraculous raising of Lazarus, 

so great and wonderful, that Jesus was a prophet, yea, more, the 

Messiah, as He professed. 

Ver. 46. But some of them went their ways, &c. S. Augustine 

doubts whether they did this with good or evil intention ; whether 

to announce to them that they might believe, or to betray Him that 

they might use severity, as says the Gloss. For they might do this 

with a good intention, namely, in order that the Pharisees, if they 

could not bring themselves to believe in Christ, should at least have 

a milder disposition towards Him, as Origen is of opinion. But 

all others think that they did it with an evil intention. Theophilus 

and Leontius add that they intended to accuse Christ as being sac-

rilegious, and even so far as that He had dug up the body of a dead 

person. Great then was their malice and malignity, with which they 

repaid Christ for so great a benefit, [inflicting on Him] so great 

an outrage—for a miracle blasphemy, for life death; since they 

denounced Him to the Pharisees to be condemned to the cross. 

Ver. 47. Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a 

council, &c. 

What do we ? (What does it behove us to do ? Syriac, What 

shall we do ?) 

For this man doeth many miracles. It behoved them to be con-

vinced by so many signs and miracles of Jesus, and to believe Him 

to be Messiah, the Son of God ; but blinded by hate and envy, they 

say and do the contrary, and studiously avoid condescending even 

to name Him, but say, This man, as if He were a common and 

worthless person (" They still call Him man," says Chrysostom, "who 

had received so great a proof of His Godhead "), and consult con-

cerning His murder, and propose to bereave of life Him who had 

restored life to Lazarus, and from whom they ought to seek and hope 

for life eternal. They did not say, " Let us believe," says S. Augustine,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwift4fT5iIzUBMD1vmkr3-noKT-lkrJT2Dbugr4dPe2eD8wWCDC2pjVRlOxqM_CN7C4EqZ2w2XpKNZll0qg_2PX13AK3ZRqJlF9b0ySaFTE0qKdv7K5LBOsRXvdKNIgk959HtDUQ=w615-h900-v0

0b3c5181-4354-47c3-81bf-ccaf2e7a0c9a

4i2 s. John, c. xi. 

"but, lost men as they were, thought more of how they might injure 

Him, and destroy Him, than of how they might consult for their own 

safety, that they perish not. Their foolish heart was darkened, so 

that they forced on the destruction, present and lasting, of them-

selves and their whole nation." "What foolishness and blindness," 

says Origen, " that they should think themselves able to effect any-

thing against Him whom they testify to have done many miracles, 

as if He were not able to deliver Himself out of their snares ! 

" 

Ver. 48. 

 

If we let Him thus alone, &c. I.e., the Romans will 

destroy Judea and the whole Jewish race. S. Chrysostom and 

Theophylact by place nnA^x^zx^AJerusalem, the metropolis of Judea, 

and thence the whole realm. But Maldonatus understands the 

Temple; for the chief priests feared that this with its victims and 

temporal gains should be taken from them by the Romans. 

All will believe on Him. See here the genius of envy, and an effect 

worthy of it : the chief priests wishing to obscure the glory of Christ, 

display it the more, in saying that all men will believe on Him. 

And the Romans shall come and take away our place and nation. 

Some are of opinion that they thought this, viz., If all believe on 

Jesus, all will depart from us, our Judaism, synagogue, and state, 

to Him ; and so there will be none to contend for us against the 

Roman attempts to subjugate us. 

But others more probably, If all believe Jesus to be the King 

and Messiah of the Jews, they will irritate against us the Romans, 

the lords of Judea, because we have made for ourselves a new King 

and Messiah, and fallen away from Tiberius Caesar to Him ; where-

fore armed men will come and take away, that is, capture, ravage, 

and destroy Jerusalem and Judea and the entire Jewish race and 

nation. So Chrysostom. " They wished," he says, " to excite the 

people, so as to bring Him under the risk of being suspected to be 

a pretender to royalty ; i.e., if the Romans shall see Jesus heading 

throngs of people, they will suspect a pretender, and destroy the 

state. But what armed men and horsemen did Christ ever take 

about with Him ? Only envy and hate blinded them, so that they 

plainly erred, and reasoned wrongly. "

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxEgza5SyTRO-iS4SfDA5jo2KgiayCbFvwTjXFUJxanDZRk8UnQmJulEyJwh3vD4Vlyz6JESSGIPBoK2bDUyvXPAKXtit87XCYrE1mCmFzbl1xTJxt57bRrucV8bhBpqJbhXKmL-g=w615-h900-v0

399c571c-3567-4265-945c-6edef6dfbe6a

THE OFFICE OF HIGH PRIEST. 4' 

 

Ver. 49. 

 

And one of them named Caiaphas, being the high priest 

that same year, said unto them. While the rest were consulting 

and not grasping the case nor finding what it was needful to 

do, Caiaphas as high priest proffers advice, and clearly defines the 

matter. It is said, high priest that year, because, although according 

to the law in Exodus (xxix. 29) the high priesthood ought to last for 

life, and after that to devolve upon the eldest son, according to the 

law of birth, the Roman rulers used to change the high priests fre-

quently, either according to their own will, or for a price received 

from those who sought the office (Josephus, Antiq., lib. xviii. cap. 

2), When Tiberius succeeded Augustus Caesar in the empire, " by 

him," he says, " Valerius Gratus was sent to succeed Annius Rufus 

as procurator of Judea. This man deprived Ananus of the high 

priesthood, and appointed Ismael the son of Tabus to be high priest. 

He also deposed him in a little time, and transferred the honour to 

Eleazar the son of Ananus, the former high priest, and when he had 

held it for a year, Gratus deprived him of it, and assigned it to 

Simon the son of Camithus; and he also having completed a year 

in the dignity, was made to yield it to Joseph, who was surnamed 

Caiaphas." 

The high priesthood was not therefore an annual office among 

the Jews, as S. Augustine infers from this place ; but was changed 

sometimes in fewer years, sometimes in more, and sometimes in 

the course of the same year. 

Ye know nothing at all, &c. Ye, as if you were common and 

humble people, are foolish, ye do not understand the matter at all, 

ye do not grasp what it is needful to do, ye forward nothing, ye 

explain nothing, ye suggest no pertinent counsel ; but I as high 

priest am enlightened by God, I set right the matter with a word, 

I give the best advice, and clear up the whole by saying : " It is 

expedient that one man, that is, Jesus, although He is accused of 

no crime, although He is innocent and a Prophet, and the doer of 

so great a miracle, should die (that is, be put to death by you) for 

the people, that is, so that the people because of Him should not be 

brought into suspicion with the Romans, nor that the Romans,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxp7EcBQ7P0j4Y_Cnki11Aou89xA7TNSuK4eXQtgECiYU-Agx00_5xjDsVCyQByPbD41NpsRx8KzfsGE7MuMV204SELf_xO85sjtgGN6kckzgoPewJwKAtTDWFUWChUSRlXD4d8tQ=w615-h900-v0

83e18a7b-300e-4ad7-b482-a78d4d6cae7d

4H S. JOHN, C. XL 

because of Jesus regarded as Messiah and King of the Jews, should 

take away their place and nation ; and thus the entire race will not 

perish, but when He is taken away, will remain safe and entire." 

This was therefore the impious, false, and unjust judgment of 

Caiaphas, that it was expedient for the safety of the people, that, 

though innocent, Christ should be put to death, so that the Romans 

might not use severity to Judea and the Jews on His account. 

His reasoning was, that it was better for one Jesus to die than 

many; it is better that one should perish, than the whole com-

munity; i.e., why then do ye delay? why deliberate? It is not 

doubtful to me that it is expedient for one to die, Jesus, in place of 

all the Jews. 

Origen says, " They had learned nothing who had not learned 

Jesus ; as it is said, If thou knowest Jesus, it suffices, though thou 

knowest not other things. If thou knowest not Jesus, it is nought, 

though thou knowest all things besides." 

Ver. 51. 

 

And this spake he that Jesus should die for that 

nation: i.e., of the Jews. 

Note, that Caiaphas, with the other chief priests being most 

hostile to Christ, wished out of private hate towards Him to speak 

out distinctly the same thing which the others secretly hinted at, 

but did not expressly state ; namely, that Christ must be taken out 

of the way for the safety of the people, that they might not be 

attacked by the Romans, as I have said. But the Spirit turned the 

force of his words, when he wished to speak in this sense, as high 

priest and head of the Church, to others in which he should 

express the contrary meaning, and should describe and strengthen 

a very true faith in Christ ; namely, that it was expedient that 

Christ should die for the people, i.e., for the salvation of the people; 

and by His death, as if by the payment of a price, should redeem 

them from sin, from the devil, from death, and from hell, those, I 

say, who would otherwise perish eternally. For the words of 

Caiaphas properly and precisely signify this. For otherwise, accord-

ing to the wicked intention towards Christ in the mind of Caiaphas, 

he ought rather to have said thus : " It is expedient that one man,

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyeh-d_Jsn4Xh9sSGY4-76ljWPPaJkL_pSA5FsWyIHCsdeNCOA8hK51GPqhnlBbCeG9J0qSOTioOKEcZOvjTgVRrDuP4t6X_vk-GgpuNZ2iJrd7pNFQB6iuboOb5uW-C95l2pIPBw=w615-h900-v0

95f87d1e-f356-4216-8d27-593e0879a309

FALL OF THE JEWISH CHURCH. 41$ 

Jesus, should die, rather than the whole people : " but now he does 

not say rather than but for (in behalf of) the people; which pro-

perly signifiesy&r the salvation of the people^ that He may save the 

people : and although Caiaphas did not understand this, much less 

intend it, yet it being wonderfully suggested by the Holy Spirit, S. 

John here takes notice of it; and as he takes notice of it, so other 

sincere and honest men who were listening to Caiaphas might have 

noticed the same thing ; and just so may we. 

Learn from this the great care which God has of His Church, and 

how He assists the Pontiff who is her head, especially under the 

new Law, which Christ her Head and Spouse instituted, sanctioned, 

and rules, lest at any time the Church which is His bride should go 

astray from the true faith. 

Further, because Caiaphas did not understand this mystery he 

was not properly a prophet; and Origen observes that the Holy Ghost spoke through his mouth as the angel spoke to the dis-

obedient Balaam by the mouth of the ass (Numb, xxii.) Caiaphas, 

then, most wickedly twisted the words of the Holy Spirit to the 

death of Christ. Wherefore S. Chrysostom says that the Holy 

Spirit moved the tongue of Caiaphas, not his heart. 

You will say, Then Caiaphas here erred in the faith. I reply by denying the consequence. Yea he formally declared the true faith, 

namely, that it was expedient that Christ should die for the salvation 

of the world, as I have said. And though it be that he himself did 

not understand this, nor mean to say it—for he intended that Christ 

should be cut off lest, because of Him, the people (of the Jews) 

should be destroyed by the Romans—yet herein was his error con-

trary to justice and piety, and not in a matter pertaining to the faith. 

His error had to do with a political question, whether, namely, Christ 

should be put to death for the State, or not. Besides, the Jewish 

High Priest had not that infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost 

which the Christian High Priests have from Christ and after Christ. 

It is, moreover, especially to be borne in mind that at that time, 

Christ being come, the Jewish Synagogue was beginning to fall, and 

Christ's Church to rise up in its place. For shortly after this

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxLNNAcqQGHV3N9EyOH5bx-keA2Zy_WE5uklDBTNbNG0t1QSCe8LJPojg5hZ-GjeZuyWvnLc-MOdbEOUh0UGNaK9lxAOda6crnjh8SdGPDcDHgnbYXjBTuxJXjo9e8fD0jpsrN64w=w615-h900-v0

42b9bfa5-8bee-47cf-86a5-d1a9684e1024

416 S. JOHN, c. XT. 

Caiaphas with the whole council of the Sanhedrim proclaimed Jesus 

to be guilty of death as a false Messiah. This was an error in the 

Faith. Wherefore their Synagogue then ceased to be the Church of 

God, and began to be the synagogue of Satan which denied and 

slew the Christ which was sent by God. 

Ver. 52. 

 

And not for that nation only, &c. It is expedient that 

Christ should die ; not only for His and our nation, that is, for the 

Jews, but also for all the nations dispersed throughout the whole 

world, and who should believe in Him. For these are called 

children of God, not in actual fact, but in the foreknowledge and 

predestination of God ; because, that is to say, they were hereafter 

to be, by the grace of God, faithful men and saints, and therefore 

sons of God. So SS. Augustine and Chrysostom. This is what 

Christ predicted in chap. x. ver. 16 : Other sheep Ihave, which are not 

of this fold (not of the Jewish synagogue); them also 1 must bring, 

and there shall be onefold, and one Shepherd. 

Ver. 53. Thenfrom that day forth, &c. See here plainly appears 

the unrighteous disposition and meaning of Caiaphas and his asso-

ciates. 

Ver. 54. -Jesus therefore tvalked no more openly among the Jeivs, 

i.e., freely, openly, publicly. S. Cyril says : " As God He knew 

what the Jews had determined on, though none of them declared it 

; 

as man He withdrew Himself, because the hour of His death, 

decreed by His Father, had not yet come." He did this to give 

an example to us, of avoiding peril to life by flight. 

But went thence, &c. Leontius thinks Ephraim was Bethlehem, 

in which Christ had been born; but this seems unlikely, because 

Bethlehem was near to Jerusalem, and Jesus knew that He would 

be specially sought there by the chief priests. S. Jerome, and after 

him Jansenius, think it was Ephron (2 Chron. xiii. 19). Others 

think that Ephraim was situated above Jericho, and beside the 

desert there; but Adrichomius places it about five miles towards the east from Bethel, about seven hours' [journey] distant from Jerusalem, beside the desert of Hai, not far from the brook Cherith, 

to which Elijah, flying from Jezebel, withdrew, and was fed there by

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyG8B77kbFWrm6z-Ld-ADiZ-2G0q2JoWhO3pWDbG7B_eKKdllF55NpAkdK21yl0-49qYgH4cUQi18ZBzO-3LTUBe_MKkgwxMkdlwky7gyfrRGDt0SG5yrYCj7eaBWEKFKcQ6Sj11Q=w615-h900-v0

82cbed17-d4f1-4fb3-971f-7075dce9d534

THE JEWS SEEK CHRIST. A l 7 

ravens (i Kings xvii. 5). Jesus withdrew thither, as well that He 

might avoid the rage of the chief priests for the time, as that He 

might have leisure in that retirement for prayer and contemplation, 

and thus strengthen and arm Himself for His approaching death, 

for the arduous contest with the chief priests—yea, more, with 

Lucifer—when He was upon the Cross. 

Ephraim is symbolically the type of the Gentile Church. So 

Origen says: "Jesus was lately dwelling among the Jews, the 

Divine Word, that is to say, through the prophets ; but He departed, 

He is not among them, for He has entered a hamlet which is almost 

deserted, of which it is said, ' Many are the sons of the deserted 

one more than of the married : 

' for Ephraim is interpreted fertility. 

But Ephraim was the brother of Manasseh, of an elder people given 

over to forgetfulness ; for after a people devoted to forgetfulness 

had been passed over, abundance has come forth from the Gentiles. 

The Lord then, departing from the Jews, came to a land nigh to 

the desert, a city called fruitful, the Church of the whole earth, and 

there He tarries with His disciples even until now." 

Typically, Ephraim, as situated beside the desert, is the symbol 

of a holy soul which has leisure for solitude and prayer ; for this 

becomes Ephraim—that is, fruitful in good works : wherefore Jesus 

tarries in it by His abundant grace. 

Ver. 55. 

 

And the Jews' Passover was nigh at hand : viz., the last 

Passover to Christ, at which He Himself, as the Paschal Lamb, was 

sacrificed for the salvation of the world ; and therefore He eagerly 

waited for it. The Syrians for Pascha say Pezcho, which is interpreted 

gladness; because this feast was more joyful than the others, even 

as to Christians it is so in the highest degree, because of our 

redemption made upon the Cross, and because of the resurrection. 

And many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the Pass-

over, to purify themselves ; i.e., to cleanse themselves by sacrifices 

and ceremonies from all actual uncleanness, and to prepare them-

selves by prayers and sacrifices to celebrate and eat the Passover 

rightly, as says S. Thomas and Jansen. 

Ver. 56.-Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves 

 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzVEIxLhI7GBRf5BTPFgcZNEjlYYvyW7O9Jbdc13FfVJddBtDAfYwRi9OpzUcd96lfYgU9187Q3WgXd4-2sFmzBCDbqr8skwdv2FDSxHgPMUEYaHC6tZzN2SIy6j3udg9KCaoAI=w615-h900-v0

80869ce0-161f-4167-bb4d-96cf5dac486e

418 S. JOHN, C. XL 

as they stood in the Temple, What think ye, that He will not come to 

thefeastl Wherefore did Jesus not come, according to His custom, 

to this common feast of the Passover? Certainly because as God 

He knew beforehand the snares prepared for Him there by the 

scribes. S. Augustine, Chrysostom, &c, think that this was the 

question of the chief priests, Pharisees, and of their adherents and 

assistants, who had determined to apprehend Jesus, and therefore 

began indignantly to demand : Why has Jesus not come to the 

feast of the Passover? Is this the way ye neglect the Passover? 

Will He be thus a contemner and violator of the law, the very charge 

which we bring against Him ? Then why does He not present 

Himself on these days before the Passover, and purify Himself as 

all others do, and so prepare Himself for so great a feast ? 

END OF VOL.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy5Wbcy5xKo558AFXS48vBpQKThTg1B7EQ0vWDzUxTvVtV2J3nNLuYwdTwj9I1K0208j59Zg5me8Tc-WX2P960waU5jNwvck-50GO2xTaSXteDmDaD2Prcizeccsq9ze47YDU1a=w874-h1280-v0

3d122089-f4d7-4645-8f59-949d7d321bd1